Letter LXXXIII. 

Rica to Ieben, at Smyrna. 

Although the French are great talkers, there is never¬ 
theless among them a sort of silent dervishes, called 
Carthusians. They are said to cut out their tongues on 
entering the convent; and it is much to be desired that 
all other dervishes would deprive themselves in the same 
way of that which their profession renders useless to 
them. 

Talking of these taciturn people reminds me that there 
are others who excel them in taciturnity, and who have 
a very remarkable gift. These are they who know how 
to talk without saying anything; and who carry on a 
conversation for two whole hours without its being pos¬ 
sible to discover their meaning, to rehearse their talk, or 
to remember a word of what they have said. 

This class of people are adored by the women; but 
not so much as some others who have received from 


LETTER LXXXIII. 


17 


nature the charming gift of smiling at the proper time, 
that is to say, every moment; and who receive with de¬ 
lighted approbation everything the ladies say. 

But these people carry wit to its highest pitch; for 
they can detect subtlety in everything, and perceive a 
thousand little ingenious touches in the merest common¬ 
places. 

I know others of them who are fortunate enough to be 
able to introduce into conversation inanimate things, and 
to make a long story about an embroidered coat, a white 
peruke, a snuff-box, a cane, a pair of gloves. It is well 
to begin in the street to make oneself heard by the noise 
of a coach and a thundering rap at the door: such a 
prologue paves the way for the rest of the discourse; 
and when the exordium is good, it secures toleration for 
all the nonsense which follows, but which, fortunately, 
arrives too late to be detected. 

I assure you that these little gifts, which with us are 
of no account, are of great advantage here to those 
who are happy enough to possess them; and that a 
sensible man has no chance of shining where they are 
displayed. 

Paris, the 6th of the second moon of 
Rebiab, 1715. 


II. 


D 


iS 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
