LETTER CXXVI. 


107 


fathers shall delay their marriage until, having attained 
the age prescribed by the statutes, they can insist on 
being portioned. We forbid our magistrates to provide 
for the education of their children.” 

Paris, the 1st of the moon of 
Chalval, 1718. 

Letter CXXVI, 

Rica to * * * 

It is a puzzling thing in all religions to give any idea of 
the pleasures ordained for those who live well. It is 
easy to terrify the wicked with a long list of the torments 
which await them ; but who knows what to promise the 
virtuous. Joys seem by nature to be of short duration, 
the imagination can hardly picture them otherwise. 

I have seen descriptions of Paradise sufficient to make 
all sensible people give up their hopes of it: some make 
the happy shades play incessantly on the flute; others 
condemn them to the torture of an everlasting pro¬ 
menade ; while others, who represent them as dreaming 
on high of their mistresses below, are of opinion that a 
period of a hundred million years is not sufficient to 
overcome a taste for the pains of love. 

I remember, in this connection, a story which I heard 
told by a man who had been in the country of the Mogul; 
it shows that the Indian priests are as fertile as others in 
their ideas of the pleasures of Paradise. 

A woman who had just lost her husband, went in due 


108 PERSIAN LETTERS. 

form to the governor of the city demanding permission 
to burn herself; but since, in the countries subject to the 
Mohammedans, they have abolished to the best of their 
ability that cruel custom, he refused her absolutely. 

When she saw that her prayers were in vain, she flew 
into a transport of rage. “ Look you," said she, “ how 
you torment me ! A poor woman is not even allowed to 
burn herself when she has a mind to ! Did one ever see 
the like ! My mother, my aunt, my sisters, were all 
decently burned ! And, when I come to ask permission 
of this confounded governor, he gets angry, and begins 
raging like a madman.” 

A young bonze 1 happened to be present. “ Infidel,” 
said the governor to him, “ is it you who have set on this 
woman to commit this folly ? ” “ No,” said he, “ I never 

spoke to her; but if she believes as I do, she will com¬ 
plete her sacrifice; she will perform an action pleasing to 
the god Brahma : she will also be well rewarded, for she 
will find her husband in the other world, and begin with 
him a second marriage.” “What do you say?” cried 
the woman, astonished. “ I shall find my husband 
again ? Ah ! I will not burn myself then. He was 
jealous, peevish, and, besides, so old, that if the god 
Brahma has not brought about some improvement in 
him, assuredly he has no need of me. Burn myself for 
him !. . . not even the end of my finger to take him 
from the bottom of hell. Two old bonzes who misled 

1 Bonzes are the Buddhist priests of China, whom Montesquieu 
seems to have confounded with the Brahmins of India. 


LETTER CXXVII. 


109 


me, and who knew what kind of life I led with him, took 
care to tell me nothing of this; if the god Brahma has 
no other present to make me, I renounce this felicity. 
Mr. Governor, I will be a Mohammedan. And for you,” 
turning to the bonze, “ you can, if you like, go and tell 
my husband that I am very well.” 

Paris, the 2nd of the moon of 
Chalval, 171$.
