Letter LXI. 

USBEK TO RHEDI, AT VENICE. 

I went the other day into a famous church called Notre 
Dame. While I was admiring this magnificent building 
I had an opportunity of conversing with an ecclesiastic, 
led there, like myself, by curiosity. The conversation 
turned upon the peaceful life enjoyed by those of his 
profession. “Most people,” said he, “envy the happi¬ 
ness of our condition, and they are right. However, it 
has its disadvantages: although we are in a measure 
separated from the world, yet a thousand things require 
our presence in it; and in this way we have a very diffi¬ 
cult part to fill. 

“ Worldly people are truly astonishing: they can en¬ 
dure neither our praise nor our blame : if we desire to 
admonish them, they think us ridiculous; if to commend 
them, they regard us as undignified. Nothing can be 
more humiliating than the thought that one has offended 
even the wicked. We are therefore compelled to adopt 
an ambiguous method, and to influence libertines, not 
by a direct appeal, but by the uncertainty in which our 
manner of receiving their remarks leaves them. This 
requires abundance of talent, it is so difficult to maintain 
a neutral attitude : men of the world who risk everything, 
who give themselves up to all their fancies, dropping 
them or pursuing them, according to their felicity, suc¬ 
ceed much better. 


i. 


T 


«38 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


“ This is not all. We cannot preserve in the world 
that happy peaceful state which is so loudly praised. As 
soon as we appear there, we are forced into argument: 
for example, we have to undertake to prove to a man who 
does not believe in God, the efficacy of prayer; or the 
necessity of fasting, to another who all his life has denied 
the immortality of the soul: the task is heavy, and the 
laughter is not on our side. Besides this, a desire to 
convert others to our own opinions, which belongs, as it 
were, to our profession, torments us endlessly ; and is as 
ridiculous as if Europeans, anxious to improve human 
nature, were to try to change the Ethiopian’s skin. We 
disturb the state, and torment ourselves to enforce points 
of religion which are not fundamental: we are like that 
conqueror of China, who drove his subjects to a general 
revolt, by insisting that they should cut their hair or their 
nails. 

“ The zeal which we have to secure the fulfilment of 
the duties of our holy religion on the part of those over 
whom we are placed, is often dangerous, and cannot be 
accompanied by too much prudence. An emperor, 
called Theodosius, put to the sword all the inhabitants of 
a certain town, even to the women and children. Imme¬ 
diately afterwards, as he was about to enter a church, a 
bishop, Ambrose by name, shut the doors against him as 
a sacrilegious murderer: in doing so he performed an 
heroic action. This emperor, having shortly done the 
penance which such a crime required, and being admitted 
into the church, the same bishop made him come from 


LETTER LXII. 


>39 


among the priests with whom he had seated himself: 
that was the action of a fanatic. Thus you see how true 
it is, that one should not be over-zealous. Of what im¬ 
portance was it to religion or to the state, whether this 
prince had, or had not, a place among the priests ? ” 

Paris, the 1st of the first moon of 
Rebiab, 1714.
