Letter XXXVI. 

USBEK TO RHEDI, AT VENICE. 

Coffee is very much used in Paris; there are a great 
many public houses where it may be had. In some of 
these they meet to gossip, in others to play at chess. 


LETTER XXXVI. 


83 


There is one 1 where the coffee is prepared in such a way 
that it makes those who drink it witty : at least, there is 
not a single soul who on quitting the house does not 
believe himself four times wittier than when he entered it. 

But that which shocks me most in these geniuses, is, 
that they are quite useless to their country, and amuse 
their talents with puerilities. For example, when I 
arrived at Paris I found them warm in dispute over the 
most trifling matter imaginable . 2 3 It was all about an old 
Greek poet, whose birthplace and time of dying no one 
has known for two thousand years. Both sides agreed 
that he was a most excellent poet: it was only a question 
of the degree of merit to be ascribed to him. Each 
wished to fix his rank ; but among those apportioners of 
praise, some carried more weight than others. Here you 
have the whole dispute. It was a lively quarrel; for 
both sides abused each other most heartily with such 
gross aspersions, and such bitter raillery, that I admired 
the conduct of the quarrel, as much as the subject of it. 
“ If anyone,” said I to myself, “ were fool enough to 
attack, in the presence of the defenders of the Greek 
poet, the reputation of some honest citizen, he would 
surely find a warm reception; and, indeed, I believe that 
this extreme zeal for the reputation of the dead, would 
blaze up to some purpose in defence of the living. But, 

1 The Cafe Procope, a rendezvous of the wits of the eighteenth 

century. 

3 The quarrel regarding the relative merits of the ancients and the 
moderns, in which Homer was the chief subject of dispute. 


84 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


however that may be,” added I, “ God keep me from 
ever drawing on myself the enmity of these censors of 
this poet, who has not been saved from their implacable 
hate even after having lain two thousand years in his 
grave ! At present they fight the air; but how would it 
be, if their rage were animated by the presence of an 
enemy? ” 

Those of whom I have told you dispute in the vulgar 
tongue; and must be distinguished from another set of 
disputants, who employ a barbarous language , 1 which 
seems to increase the fury and the obstinacy of the com¬ 
batants. There are places 2 where these people are to be 
seen struggling as in a battle, dismal and confused; they 
are fed upon subtleties, they live upon obscure argu¬ 
ments and false inferences. This profession, although 
one would think its followers would die of hunger, must 
pay in some way. A whole nation, driven from their 
own country , 3 has been seen to cross the sea and establish 
itself in France, carrying with it no other means of pro¬ 
viding for the necessities of life, than a notable talent for 
debate. Farewell. 

Paris, the last day of the moon of 
Zilhage, 1713. 

1 The Latin of the schools. 

3 The Sorbonne and the University. 

1 An allusion to a seminary of Irish priests instituted in 1677 by 
some refugees. 


LETTER XXXVII. 


85
