Letter IX. 

The Chief Eunuch to Ibbi , 1 at Erzeroum. 

You follow your old master on his travels; you wander 
through provinces and kingdoms; no grief can make any 
impression on you ; you see new sights all day long; 
everything you behold entertains you, and you are un¬ 
conscious of the flight of time. 

It is not so with me. Shut up in a hideous prison, I 
am always surrounded by the same objects; there is no 
change even in what vexes me. Weighed down by fifty 
years of care and annoyance, I lament my wretched case: 
all my life long I have never passed a single untroubled 
day, or known a peaceful moment. 

When my first master formed the cruel design of en¬ 
trusting his wives to my care, and induced me by flatter¬ 
ing promises, supplemented by a thousand threats, to 
separate myself for ever from my manhood, tired of the 
toilsome service in which I was engaged, I calculated 
that the sacrifice of my passions would be more than 
repaid by ease and wealth. How unfortunate was I! 
Preoccupied with the thought of the ills I would escape, 
I had no idea of the others to which I fled: I expected 
that the inability to satisfy love would secure me from its 
assaults. Alas ! although passion had been rendered in- 

1 This is the only letter to Ibbi, and there is only one from him, 
the XXXIX. He must not be confounded with Ibben, to whom 
many letters are addressed. 


LETTER IX. 


23 


efficient, its force remained unabated; and, far from 
being relieved, I found myself surrounded by objects 
which continually whetted my desires. When I entered 
the seraglio, where everything filled me with regret for 
what I had lost, my agitation increased each moment; a 
thousand natural charms seemed to unfold themselves to 
my sight only to tantalize me ; and to crown my misery, 
I had constantly before me their fortunate possessor. 
While this wretched time lasted, I never led a woman to 
my master’s bed without feeling wild rage in my heart, 
and despair unutterable in my soul. 

And thus I passed my miserable youth, with no confi¬ 
dant but my own bosom. Wearied with longing and sad 
as night, there was nothing left but to endure in silence. 
I was forced to turn the sternest glances on those very 
women whom I would fain have regarded with looks of 
love. It would have undone me had they read my 
thoughts : how they would have tyrannized over me ! I 
remember one day, as I attended a lady at the bath, 
I was so carried away that I lost command of myself, and 
dared to lay my hand where I should not. My first 
thought was that my last day had come. I was, how¬ 
ever, fortunate enough to escape a dreadful death; but 
the fair one, whom I had made the witness of my 
weakness, extorted a heavy price for her silence: I 
entirely lost command of her, and she forced me, each 
time at the risk of my life, to comply with a thousand 
caprices. 

At length, the fire of youth burnt out, I grow old and 


24 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


become, in that particular, at peace with myself. Women 
I regard with indifference, I pay them back for all their 
contempt, and all the torments which I suffered through 
them. I never forget that I was born to command them, 
and in the exercise of my authority I feel as if I had re¬ 
covered my lost manhood. I hate women now that I can 
regard them without passion, and detect and discuss all 
their weaknesses. Although I guard them for another, I 
experience a secret joy in making myself obeyed. When 
I take all their pleasures from them, I feel as if it were at 
my behest alone; and that always gives me satisfaction 
more or less direct. The seraglio is my empire ; and my 
ambition, the only passion left me, finds no small gratifi¬ 
cation. I mark with pleasure that all depends on me, 
and that my presence is required at all times: I willingly 
incur the hatred of all these women, because that 
establishes me more firmly in my post. And they do not 
hate me for nothing, I can tell you : I interfere with their 
most innocent pleasures ; I am always in the way, an in¬ 
surmountable obstacle; before they know where they are 
they find their schemes frustrated; I am armed with 
refusals, I bristle with scruples; not a word is heard 
from me but duty, virtue, chastity, modesty. I make 
them desperate by dinning them with the weakness 
of their sex, and the authority of our master. Then 
I lament the necessity which requires me to be so severe, 
and lead them to believe that my only motives are their 
truest interests and my profound attachment to them 
Do not suppose that in my turn I have not to suffer 


LETTER IX. 


25 


endless unpleasantness. Every day these women seek 
occasions to repay me with interest, and their reprisals 1 
are often terrible. Between us there goes on a constant 
interchange of ascendancy and obedience. They are 
always putting upon me the meanest services; they affect 
a sublime contempt; and, regardless of my age, they 
force me to rise ten times during the night for the merest 
trifle. I am worn off my feet with endless commissions, 
orders, employments, and caprices; one would think that 
they take turn about in inventing occupations for me. 
They often amuse themselves by making me doubly vigi¬ 
lant ; they give me imaginary confidences. Sometimes I 
am told that a young man has been seen prowling round 
the walls, or a startling noise has been heard, or someone 
is about to receive a letter. All this bothers me, and 
amuses them; they are delighted when they see me tor¬ 
menting myself. Sometimes they station me behind 
the door, and keep me standing there night and day. 
They well know how to pretend to be ill, to swoon away, 
to be frightened out of their wits: they are never at a loss 
for some pretext to work their will on me. When they 
are in this mood, implicit obedience, unquestioning com¬ 
pliance are my only resources: a refusal from such a man 
as I am would be a thing unheard of; and if I were to 
hesitate in obeying them, they could punish me at their 

1 Rivers in the original. M. Laboulaye asserts that Montesquieu 
is the only writer who uses revers in the sense of revanche; but 
Littre gives examples of a similar use of the word in Moliere and 
Bossuet. 


1. 


E 


26 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


discretion. I would sooner die, my dear Ibbi, than 
submit to such humiliation. 

But this is not all. I am never for an instant sure of 
my master’s favour; for each of his wives is an enemy 
who never ceases to hope for my ruin. They take advan¬ 
tage of certain snatches of time when I cannot be heard, 
when he can refuse them nothing, and when I am always 
in the wrong. I conduct to my master’s bed women 
whose spite is roused against me: do you imagine that 
they will move a finger in my behalf, or say a single word 
in my favour ? I have everything to fear from their tears, 
their sighs, their embraces, from their very pleasures; it 
is their time of triumph ; their charms are arrayed against 
me: their present services obliterate in a moment all 
those rendered by me in the past; and nothing can plead 
for me with a master who is no longer himself. 

Many a time I lie down high in my master’s favour, and 
awake to find myself disgraced. The day on which they 
whipped me so ignominiously round the seraglio, what 
had I done ? I leave a woman in my master’s arms : 
when she sees him impassioned she bursts into a torrent 
of tears, and pours out complaints so skilfully that they 
become more anguished in proportion as the love she 
causes grows vehement. What could I do to defend 
myself at a crisis of that kind ? When I least expected 
it, ruin overtook me; I was the victim of an amorous 
intrigue, of a treaty sealed with sighs. Behold, dear Ibbi, 
the wretched plight in which I have always lived. 

What happiness is yours ! Your duties are confined to 


LETTER X. 


27 


attendance on Usbek. It is easy for you to please him, 
and to retain his favour to your dying day. 

The Seraglio at Ispahan, the last day of 
the moon of Saphar, 1711.
