Letter CI. 

Rica to the Same. 

I told you the other day of the extraordinary incon¬ 
stancy of the French in their fashions. Yet it is incon¬ 
ceivable to what an extent they are infatuated about 
them ; everything is swayed by them : fashion is the rule 
by which they judge what is done in other nations ; what¬ 
ever is foreign-always seems to them ridiculous. I con¬ 
fess that I hardly know how to reconcile this bigoted de¬ 
votion to their customs with the inconstancy which 
changes them every day. 

When I say that they despise everything foreign, I 


52 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


mean only trifles ; for in important matters they are so 
diffident as almost to degrade themselves. They con¬ 
fess with the greatest goodwill that the other nations are 
wiser, if you grant that they are better dressed ; they are 
willing to submit themselves to the laws of a rival nation, 
provided French wig-makers may decide, like legislators, 
the form of foreign perukes. Nothing seems to them 
more glorious than to see the taste of their cooks reign¬ 
ing from north to south, and the decrees of their tire¬ 
women obeyed in every boudoir of Europe. 

With these noble advantages, what does it matter to 
them that their wisdom comes from others, and that they 
have derived from their neighbours everything relating to 
political and civil government? 

Who would imagine that the most ancient and powerful 
kingdom in Europe has been governed for ten centuries 
by laws which were not made for it ? If the French had 
been conquered, it would not be difficult to understand, 
but they are the conquerors. 

They have abandoned the old laws made by their first 
kings in the general assemblies of the nations; and, 
singularly enough, the Roman laws which have been 
substituted, were partly made and partly digested by 
emperors contemporary with their own legislators. 

And, to make the borrowing complete, and in order 
that all their wisdom might come from others, they have 
adopted all the constitutions of the Popes, and have 
made them a new part of their law: a new kind of 
slavery. 


LETTER CIL 


S3 


Latterly, it is true, they have drawn up some provincial 
statutes and by-laws; but they are nearly all taken from 
the Roman law. 

So great is the multitude of adopted, and, so to speak, 
naturalized laws, that it oppresses alike justice and judges. 
But these volumes of law are nothing in comparison with 
the appalling army of glossers, commentators, and com¬ 
pilers, a tribe as feeble by the inferiority of their minds, 
as they are strong by their immense numbers. 

This is not all: these foreign laws have introduced 
formalities so excessive as to be a disgrace to human 
reason. It would be very difficult to decide whether 
pedantry has been more hurtful in jurisprudence or in 
medicine; whether it has played more mischief under 
the cloak of a lawyer, or the broad brim of a physician ; 
and whether the one has ruined more people than the 
other has killed. 

Paris, the 17th of the moon of 
Saphar, 1717.
