Letter XXXV. 

USBEK TO GEMCHID, HIS COUSIN, DERVISH OF THE 

glorious Monastery of Tauris. 

What is your opinion, sublime dervish, of the Chris¬ 
tians ? Do you think that at the day of judgment, like 
the unbelieving Turks, who are to serve the Jews for 
asses, they will be hurried off at the gallop into hell ? I 
am well aware that their abode will not be with the 
prophets, and that the great Hali’s mission was not to 
them. But, do you think they will be condemned to 
everlasting punishment because they have not been for¬ 
tunate enough to find mosques in their country ? Will 
God chastise them for failing to practise a religion which 
1 More correctly, Zil Haj, the last month of the Persian year. 


LETTER XXXV. 


81 


he has withheld from their knowledge ? I may tell you, I 
have often examined these Christians; I have questioned 
them to find out if they had any idea about the great 
Hali, who was the most perfect of all men, and it is 
certain that they have never even heard of him. 

They are not like those infidels whom our holy pro¬ 
phets put to the sword, because they refused to believe 
in the miracles of Heaven: they are like those unfortu¬ 
nates who lived in the darkness of idolatry, before the 
divine light illumined the face of our great prophet. 

Besides, an examination of their religion reveals the 
presence of some rudiments of our doctrines. I have 
often admired the secret workings of Providence, which 
seems in this way to have prepared them for a general 
conversion. One book of their learned men, entitled 
“ Polygamy Triumphant,” 1 of which I have heard, proves 
that polygamy is enjoined upon Christians. Their bap¬ 
tism is an emblem of our ablutions ; and their only error 
consists in ascribing to that first ablution an efficacy 
which enables them to omit all others. Their priests and 
friars pray, like ours, seven times a day. They hope to 

1 The full title of the book to which Usbek alludes is, “ Poly- 
gamia triumphatrix, id est discursus politicus de polygamia, auctore 
Theophilo Aletheo, cum notis Athanasii Vincentii, omnibus anti- 
polygamis, ubique locorum, terrarum, insularum, pagorum, urbium, 
modeste et pie opposita. ” It was printed in Holland, probably in 
Amsterdam, although the name of a Swedish town appears on the 
title-page. Had it not suited Montesquieu’s purpose to refer to it, 
the very name of the book would now be unknown except to a few 
specialists, as it is dull and uninteresting. 


I. 


M 


82 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


inherit a paradise where, by means of the resurrection of 
the body, they will enjoy a thousand delights. Like us also, 
they have appointed fasts, and times of mortification, by 
which they hope to move the divine clemency. They 
worship good angels, and are in dread of evil ones. They 
believe in miracles which God works by means of his 
servants. They recognize, as we do, their own un¬ 
worthiness, and the need they have for an intercessor 
with God. Throughout their religion I find traces of 
Mohammedanism, although there is no word of Mo¬ 
hammed. It has been well said, that truth will break 
through the darkest clouds. The day is hastening when 
the Eternal will behold upon the earth none but true 
believers. Time, which devours all, will make away 
even with error. Men will be astonished to find them¬ 
selves all under the same standard: everything, the law 
itself, will be accomplished; and the godly will be taken 
from the earth, and carried to the mansions of the 
blest. 

Paris, the 20th of the moon of 
Zilhage, 1713.
