Letter LIV. 

Rica to Usbek, at # * *'. 

My room is, as you know, separated from the others only 
by a slim partition, which is broken here and there, so 
that one can hear what is said next door. This morning 
I overheard a man, pacing rapidly up and down, and say¬ 
ing to another, “I don’t know how it is, but everything 


L 


R 


122 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


seems to go against me. For more than three days I 
have said nothing which can do me honour; and I find 
myself entirely lost among the crowd of talkers; no one 
pays the least attention to me, no one speaks to me twice. 
I had prepared some brilliant passages to lighten my con¬ 
versation ; not once was I allowed to get them off. I 
had a charming story to tell; but always when I found 
an opportunity for it, people evaded it, as if on purpose. 
I have nursed some witticisms in my head for four days 
without being able to make the least use of them. If 
this continues, it will end in my becoming a fool; I can¬ 
not avoid it; it seems to be my fate. Yesterday I had 
hoped to shine in the company of four old ladies, who 
certainly had no idea of imposing on me. I had some of 
the most charming things to say imaginable; but it took 
me more than a quarter of an hour to bring the conver¬ 
sation round, and even then they failed to follow me; 
like the fatal sisters, they cut the thread of my discourse. 
Shall I tell you? It is most difficult to support the 
character of a man of wit. I fail to comprehend how you 
obtained it.” 

“ I have an idea,” replied the other. “ Let us help 
each other to gain this reputation : suppose we form a 
partnership for the purpose. Every day we shall tell each 
other what we intend to say; and we shall help each other 
so well, that if anyone attempts to interrupt the flow of 
our ideas, we shall inspire him with admiration; and if he 
refuses to be ‘fascinated, then he will be coerced. We 
shall have the points fixed at which to approve; and where 


LETTER L1V. 


123 


to smile, and where to burst out into a roar of laughter, 
will all be arranged beforehand. You will see that we 
shall give the tone to conversation, and that everybody 
will admire the nimbleness of our wit, and the felicity of 
our repartees ; and we shall have a code of head-shakes for 
our mutual protection. To-day you will shine, to-morrow 
you will be my foil. We shall go together to a house, and 
I shall exclaim, indicating you, ‘ I must tell you the de¬ 
lightful reply my friend made just now to a man we 
met in the street.’ I shall then turn towards you, and 
say, ‘He did not expect this. You see how astonished 
he is.’ I shall repeat some of my verses, and you will 
say, ‘ I was present when he made them ; at a supper, 
it was ; he turned them off in an instant.’ Sometimes we 
shall rally each other, and then people will exclaim, ‘Look, 
how they attack each other, how they defend themselves ; 
this is no child’s play ; let us see how he will come out of 
that. Wonderful, what presence of mind ! Why, this is 
a downright battle!’ But no one will dream how we 
practised it all beforehand. We shall have to buy certain 
books, repositories of wit composed for the use of those 
who, having none, would fain appear as if they had: all 
depends on the pattern. I should say, that before six 
months are out we should be able to keep up a conversa¬ 
tion of an hour’s length, entirely consisting of bons-mots. 
But we shall have to be very careful of one thing, and that 
is, the fate of our witticisms : it is not enough to make a 
brilliant remark, it must be sown broadcast; without that, 
it is as good as lost; and I confess there is nothing so 


124 


PERSIAN LETTERS . 


heartrending as to see a smart thing that one has said die 
in the ear of the fool who hears it. For misfortunes of 
that kind we have often, it is true, a sort of compensation 
in the speedy oblivion which overtakes the foolish things 
we say. Here, my dear sir, is the part we must play. Do 
as I have suggested, and I promise you, before six months, 
a place in the Academy. You see the time of toil will 
not be long; and then you can abandon your art as soon 
as you like; but you will always be a man of wit, no 
matter what you do. They say, that in France, when a 
man enters any circle of society, he catches at once what 
is called Vesprit du corps: this you will do, and the only 
thing I dread is, that you will be overwhelmed with 
applause.” 

Paris, the 6th of the moon of 
Zilcade, 1714.
