Letter CXXXVIII. 

Rica to Ibben, at Smyrna. 

Ministers succeed and destroy each other here like the 
seasons; during three years I have seen the financial 
system change four times. To-day taxes are levied in 
Turkey and Persia, as they were levied by the founders of 
these empires; a state of affairs very different from that 
which exists here. It is true that we do not set about it 
so intelligently as the people of the west. We imagine 
that there is no more difference between the administra¬ 
tion of the revenues of a prince and the fortune of a 
private person, than there is between counting a hundred 
thousand tomans and counting only a hundred; but the 
matter is very much more delicate and mysterious. It 
requires the greatest geniuses to work night and day, 
inventing endless new schemes with all the pains of 
travail; they must listen to the advice of a multitude 
of people, who, unasked, meddle in their affairs; they 
have to retire and live shut up in closets inaccessible to 
the great, and worshipped by the small; they must 
always have their heads full of important secrets, mira¬ 
culous plans, and new systems; and, being absorbed in 
thought, it behoves them to be deprived of the use of 
speech, and sometimes even of the ability to be polite. 

No sooner had the late king died, than they thought of 
setting up a new administration. They felt that things 


ii. 


T 


138 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


were in a bad way; but knew not how to bring about a 
better state. They did not believe in the unlimited 
authority of the preceding ministers; they wished the 
power to be divided. For that purpose five or six 
councils were created, and that ministry was perhaps the 
wisest of all those which have governed France; it did 
not last long, and neither did the good which it brought 
to pass. 

France, at the death of the late king, was a body over¬ 
come by a thousand disorders : N * * * ' took the knife 
in hand, cut away the useless flesh, and applied some 
local remedies. But there always remained an internal 
disease. A stranger came who undertook its cure.* 
After many violent remedies, he imagined he had put it 
into good condition, whereas it had only become un¬ 
healthily stout. 

All who were rich six months ago are now paupers, 
and those who lacked bread are rolling in wealth. 
These two extremities never before approached so 
near. This foreigner has turned the state as an old- 
clothesman turns a coat; he causes that to appear upper¬ 
most which was under, and that which was above he 
places beneath. What unexpected fortunes, incredible 
even to those who made them ! God creates men out of 
nothing with no greater expedition. How many valets 
are now waited on by their fellows, and may to-morrow 
be served by their former masters ! 

The oddest things happen as a result of all this. 

1 The Duke of Noailles. 1 Law. 


LETTER CXXXIX. 


139 


Lacqueys, who made their fortune in the last reign, brag 
to-day of their birth: they avenge themselves upon those 
who have just doffed their livery in a certain street , 1 for 
all the contempt poured out upon themselves six months 
before; they cry with all their might, “ The nobility is 
ruined ! What a chaotic condition the state is in ! What 
confusion of ranks ! Only nameless people now make 
fortunes ! ” And these nameless ones, you may be sure, 
will take their revenge on those who come after them ; 
in thirty years as people of quality they will make suffi¬ 
cient noise in the world. 

Paris, the 1st of the moon of 
Zilcade, 1720.
