Letter CIX. 

UsBEK TO * * * 

T here is a species of book unknown to us in Persia, and 
which seems to me to be very fashionable here: these 
are the journals . 1 Idleness feels flattered in reading 
them; it is so delightful to be able to run through thirty 
volumes in a quarter of an hour. 

In most of these books, the author has not made the 
ordinary compliments, before the reader is in despair : he 
is made to enter half dead upon a subject drowned in the 
midst of a sea of words. This one would immortalize 

1 The French journals of the eighteenth century contained nothing 
but notices of new books. 


LETTER CIX. 


71 


himself in duodecimo, that one in quarto; another with 
loftier propensities aims at a folio; he must therefore 
extend his subject in proportion ; which he does without 
mercy, counting as nothing the trouble of the poor reader, 
who worries himself to death reducing what the author 
took such pains to amplify. 

I cannot see, * # #, what merit there is in making 
such works; I could do it myself quite well, if I chose to 
ruin my health and a publisher. 

The chief fault of these journalists is, that they talk 
only of new books; as if truth were always new. It 
seems to me that until a man has read all the old books, 
he has no right to prefer the new ones. 

But when they lay it down as a law that they must never 
speak except of works hot from the press, they impose 
upon themselves another—which is, to be very tedious. 
They are very chary of criticising the works from which 
they make extracts, whatever their reason may be : and, 
indeed, what man is bold enough to wish to make ten or 
twelve enemies every month ? 

Most authors are like poets, who will take a caning 
without a murmur; but who, indifferent as to their 
shoulders, are so very jealous of their works, that they 
cannot endure the least criticism. It is necessary then to 
be very careful not to attack them in so sensitive a spot; 
and the journalists know it well. They therefore do just 
the contrary : they begin by praising the matter treated 
of; from this their first ineptitude they pass to the praise 
of the author, forced praise, for they have to do with 


72 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


people who are always on the alert, ever ready to see 
justice done themselves, and to attack with trenchant pen 
a foolhardy journalist. 

Paris, the 5th of the moon of 
Zilcade, 1718.
