Letter XVIII. 

Mollah Mehemet Ali, Servant of the Prophets, 
TO UsBEK, AT ERZEROUM. 

You are always propounding questions that have been 
laid before our holy Prophet thousands of times. Why 
do you not read the traditions of the doctors ? Why not 
go to that pure fountain-head of all intelligence ? There 
you would find all your doubts resolved. 

Unhappy man! Constantly troubled about earthly 
things, you have never looked with a single eye on those 
of heaven. You reverence the life of the Mollahs, but 
you have not the courage to embrace and follow it. 

O profane ones who never enter into the secrets of the 


LETTER XVIII. 


45 


Eternal, your light is as the darkness of the pit, and the 
reasonings of your minds are no more than the dust 
which rises as you walk, when the sun is at the highest 
pitch of noon in the scorching month of Chahban. 1 

The very zenith of your understanding does not attain 
to the nadir of that of the least of the Imans : your vain 
philosophy is but as the lightning which heralds storm 
and darkness : in the midst of the tempest, you are driven 
by the wind and tossed. 

Nothing is easier than the solution of your difficulty. 
For that purpose it is sufficient to narrate what happened 
once when our holy Prophet, tempted by the Christians 
and pestered by the Jews, effectually silenced both 
parties. 

The Jew, Abdias Ibesalon, 2 asked him why God had 
prohibited the eating of swine’s flesh. “ There is good 
reason for it,” answered Mohammed. “ The creature is 
unclean, and of that I will convince you.” He took 
some earth and shaped it into the figure of a man. 
Then he threw it on the ground, and cried, “Arise.” 
Immediately a man stood up, and said, “I am Japhet, 
the son of Noah.” “ Was your hair as white at your 
death as it is now ? ” asked the holy Prophet. “ No,” 
replied he, “ but when you roused me I thought the day 
of judgment had come; and such fear laid hold of me 
that my hair turned white on the instant.” 

1 More correctly, Shaban, the eighth month of the Persian 
year. 

2 Mohammedan tradition.—(M.) 


46 


PERSIAN' LETTERS. 


“ Now tell me,” said the messenger of God, “the whole 
history of Noah’s ark.” Japhet obeyed, and after having 
minutely recounted all that passed during the first months, 
he continued as follows : “ All the excrement of the 
animals we cast on one side of the ark, which made it 
lean so much that we were all in mortal terror, especially 
our wives, who made a terrible outcry. Our father Noah 
sought divine aid, and God commanded him to take the 
elephant and place him with his head towards the side 
that was overweighted. The excrement of the huge 
animal was so plentiful that there came forth from it a 
pig.” Do you wonder, Usbek, that since then we have 
abstained from swine’s flesh, and have regarded the 
animal as unclean ? 

“ But, as the pig wallowed every day among the filth, he 
caused such a stench in the ark that he was himself com¬ 
pelled to sneeze; and from his nose there dropped a rat, 
which began to gnaw everything that came in his way. 
This became so intolerable to Noah, that he once more 
sought God’s help in prayer. God commanded him to 
strike the lion a heavy blow on the forehead, which made 
him sneeze too, and from his nose there leapt a cat.” Are 
you yet persuaded that these animals are unclean ? How 
does it strike you ? 

When, therefore, you fail to understand the reason of 
the uncleanness of certain things, it is because you are 
ignorant of much else, and have no acquaintance with 
what has passed between God, the angels, and men. 
You know not the history of eternity; you have not read 


LETTER XIX. 


47 


the writings that were penned in heaven; what has been 
revealed to you is but an insignificant part of the divine 
library : nay, those who, like us, have approached so near 
that they may be said to live the heavenly life, are still in 
obscurity and darkness. Farewell. May Mohammed be 
in your heart! 

Koum, the last day of the moon of 
Chahban, 1711.
