Letter XXIV. 

Rica to Ibben, at Smyrna. 

We have now been a month at Paris, and all the time 
constantly moving about. There is much to do before 
one can get settled, find out the people with whom one 
has business, and procure the many requisites which are 
all wanted at the same time. 

Paris is quite as large as Ispahan. The houses are 
so high that you would swear they must be inhabited 
by astrologers. You can easily imagine that a city built 
in the air, with six or seven houses one above the other, 
is densely peopled; and that when everybody is abroad, 
there is a mighty bustle. 

You will scarcely believe that during the month I have 
been here I have not yet seen anyone walking. There 
is no people in the world who hold more by their vehicles 
than the French: they run ; they fly: the slow carriages of 
Asia, the measured step of our camels, would put them 
into a state of coma. As for me, who am not made for 
such hurry, and who often go a-foot without changing my 
pace, I am sometimes as mad as a Christian ; for, passing 
over splashing from head to foot, I cannot pardon the 
elbowings I meet with regularly and periodically. A 
man, coming up behind me, passes me, and turns me 
half round; then another, crossing me on the opposite 
side, spins me suddenly round to my first position. Be- 


LETTER XXIV. 57 

fore I have walked a hundred paces, I am more bruised 
than if I had gone ten leagues. 

You must not yet expect from me an exhaustive 
account of the manners and customs of the Europeans : 
I have myself but a faint notion of them yet, and have 
hardly had time to recover from my astonishment. 

The King of France 1 is the most powerful of Euro¬ 
pean potentates. He has no mines of gold like his 
neighbour, the King of Spain ; but he is much wealthier 
than that prince, because his riches are drawn from a 
more inexhaustible source, the vanity of his subjects. He 
has undertaken and carried on great wars, without any 
other supplies than those derived from the sale of titles of 
honour; and it is by a prodigy of human pride that 
his troops are paid, his towns fortified, and his fleets 
equipped. 

Then again, the king is a great magician, for his domi¬ 
nion extends to the minds of his subjects; he makes 
them think what he wishes. If he has only a million 
crowns in his exchequer, and has need of two millions, he 
has only to persuade them that one crown is worth two, 
and they believe it. 2 If he has a costly war on hand, 
and is short of money, he simply suggests to his subjects 

1 Louis XIV. 

3 The French kings regarded money as a mere symbol, the value 
of which they could raise or lower at their pleasure. “ Kings treat 
men as they do pieces of money ; they give them what value they 
choose, and people are forced to accept them according to their 
currency, and not according to their true worth.”— La Roche¬ 
foucauld. 


1 . 


I 


58 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


that a piece of paper is coin of the realm, and they are 
straightway convinced of it. He has even succeeded 
in persuading them that his touch is a sovereign cure for 
all sorts of diseases, so great is the power and influence 
he has over their minds. 

What I have told you of this prince need not astonish 
you : there is another magician more powerful still, who 
is master of the king’s mind, as absolutely as the king is 
master of the minds of his subjects. This magician is 
called the Pope. Sometimes he makes the king believe 
that three are no more than one ; that the bread which he 
eats is not bread; the wine which he drinks not wine; 
and a thousand things of a like nature. 

And, to keep him in practice, and prevent him from 
losing the habit of belief, he gives him, now and again, as 
an exercise, certain articles of faith. Some two years ago 
he sent him a large document which he called Constitu¬ 
tion ,’ and wished to enforce belief in all that it contained 
upon this prince and his subjects under heavy penalties. 
He succeeded in the case of the king, 2 who set the ex¬ 
ample of immediate submission ; but some of his subjects 
revolted, and declared that they would not believe a 
single word of w'hat was contained in this document. 

1 An anachronism. The date of this letter is 1712, but the Bull 
Unigenitus, which, under the name of the “Constitution,” troubled 
France during the greater part of the eighteenth century, was not 
issued till 1713. 

2 Louis XIV. submitted the more readily because he required the 
Pope’s aid to terminate the theological quarrels which had become 
insufferable to him. 


LETTER XXIV. 


59 


The women are the prime movers in this rebellion, which 
divides the court, the kingdom, and every family in the 
land, because the document prohibits them from reading 
a book which all the Christians assert is of divine origin : 
it is, indeed, their Koran. The women, enraged at this 
affront to their sex, exert all their power against the 
Constitution ; and they have brought over to their side all 
the men who are not anxious about their privilege in the 
matter. And truly, the Mufti does not reason amiss. 
By the great Hali! he must have been instructed in the 
principles of our holy religion, because, since women are 
inferior creatures compared to us, and may not, according 
to our prophets, enter into Paradise, why should they 
meddle with a book which is only designed to teach the 
way thither ? 

Some things of a miraculous nature have been told me 
of the king, which I am certain will appear to you hardly 
credible. 

It is said, that, while he was making war against such of 
his neighbours as had leagued against him, there were in his 
kingdom an infinite number of invisible foes surrounding 
him on all sides. 1 They add, that, during a thirty years’ 
search, in spite of the indefatigable exertions of certain 
dervishes who are in his confidence, 2 not one of these 
have ever been discovered. They live with him, in his 
court and in his capital, among his troops, among his 
legislators; and yet it is believed that he will have the 
mortification of dying without having discovered them. 

1 The Jansenists. 8 The Jesuits. 


6o 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


They exist, as it were, in general, but not in particular : 
they constitute a body without members. Beyond a 
doubt, heaven wishes to punish this prince for his severity 
to the vanquished, in afflicting him with invisible enemies 
of a spirit and a destiny superior to his own. 

I will continue to write you, and acquaint you with 
matters differing widely from the Persian character and 
genius. We tread, indeed, the same earth; but it seems 
incredible, remembering in the presence of the men of 
this country those of the country in which you are. 

Paris, the 4th of the second moon of 
Rebiab, 1 1712.
