Letter XL VI. 

Usbek to Rhedi, at Venice. 

I meet here certain people who are never done discussing 
religion, but who seem at the same time to contend as to 
who shall observe it least. 

1 Nicholas Flamel, a citizen of Paris (1330-1418), was regarded 
as an alchemist by those who envied his great fortune. Raymond 
Lully, a Spanish savant (1235-1315), was considered, rightly or 
wrongly, one of the most famous alchemists. 


100 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


These disputants are, however, no better Christians, 
nor even better citizens than others; and that it is that 
moves me : for the principal part of any religion consists 
in obedience to the laws, in loving mankind, and in 
revering one’s parents. 

Indeed, ought it not to be the chief aim of a religious 
man to please the Deity who has founded the religion 
which he professes? But the surest way to please God 
is, without doubt, to obey the laws of society, and do 
our duty towards men. For, whatever religion we may 
profess, as soon as we grant its existence, it becomes at 
once necessary to assume that God loves men, since He 
establishes a religion for their happiness: then, since He 
loves men, we are certain of pleasing Him in loving 
them too—in other words, in fulfilling all the duties of 
charity and humanity, and in breaking none of the laws 
under which men live. 

We are much more certain of pleasing God in this way, 
than in the observance of this or that ceremony; for 
ceremonies have no goodness in themselves; they are 
only relatively good, and on the supposition that God has 
commanded them. But this is a subject which might be 
discussed endlessly ; and one could easily deceive one¬ 
self regarding it, because it is necessary to choose the rites 
of one religion from among those of two thousand. 

A man prayed to God daily in the following terms: 
“ Lord, I do not understand any of those discussions 
that are carried on without end regarding Thee : I would 
serve Thee according to Thy will; but each man whom 


LETTER XLVI. 


ioi 


I consult would have me serve Thee according to his. 
When I desire to pray, I know not in which language to 
address Thee. Nor do I know what posture to adopt: 
one bids me pray standing ; another, sitting; and another 
requires me to kneel. That is not all: there are some 
who insist that I ought to wash every morning in cold 
water; others maintain that Thou regardest me with 
horror if I do not remove a certain small portion of my 
flesh. I happened the other day to eat of a rabbit in a 
caravansary: three men who were present made me 
tremble: all three maintained that I had grievously 
offended Thee; one , 1 because that animal was unclean; 
another , 8 because it had been strangled; and the third , 3 
because it was not a fish. A Brahmin who was passing 
by, and whom I asked to be our judge, said to me, 
‘ They are all wrong, for it appears that you did not kill 
the animal yourself.’ * I did, though,’ said I. ‘Ah, then, 
you have committed an abominable act, which God will 
never pardon,’ said he to me, in a severe tone. ‘ How 
do you know that the soul of your father had not passed 
into that beast ? ’ All these things, O Lord, trouble me 
beyond expression. I cannot move my head but I am 
threatened with Thy wrath. Nevertheless I would please 
Thee, and devote to that end the life which Thou hast 
given me. I may be deceiving myself; but I think that 
the best means to accomplish this aim is to live as a 
good citizen in the society where Thou hast placed me, 

1 A Jew.— (M.). 3 A Turk.—(M.) 

8 An Armenian.—(M.) 


102 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


and as a good father in the family which Thou hast 
given me.” 

Paris, the 8th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1713.
