Letter XC. X 

USBEK TO IBBEN, AT SMYRNA. 

The desire of glory is in no sense different from the in¬ 
stinct of self-preservation common to all creatures. We 
seem to enlarge our existence when we are enabled to 
extend it to the memory of others; it is a new life which 
we acquire, and which becomes as precious to us as that 
which we receive from heaven. 

But men are as unlike in their attachment to life as 

1 This letter contains the germ of “ the principles of the three 
governments,” a theory expounded by Montesquieu in the third 
book of “ L’Esprit des Lois.” 


30 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


they are in their sensibility to fame. This noble passion 
is always deeply engraved in their hearts; but imagina¬ 
tion and education modifies it in a thousand ways. 

This difference which exists between man and man, is 
even more marked among nations. 

It may be laid down as a maxim that in each state 
the desire of glory increases and diminishes with the 
liberty of the subject :~glory is never the companion of 
slavery. 

A sensible man said to me the other day, “ In most 
things we are much freer in France than in Persia; and 
so we love glory more. This happy idea causes a French¬ 
man to do with pleasure and inclination what your Sultan 
obtains from his subjects only by keepingconstantly before 
them rewards and punishments. 

“ Again, among us the prince is most jealous of the 
honour of the meanest of his subjects. For its support 
there exist highly esteemed tribunals: it is the sacred 
treasure of the nation, and the only one which the sove¬ 
reign does not control, because to do so would defeat his 
own interests. So that if a subject finds his honour 
wounded by his prince, whether by some preference, or 
by the slightest mark of contempt, he leaves at once his 
court, his employment, his service, and retires to his 
estate. 

“ The difference between the French troops and yours 
is this: among the latter, composed of slaves who are 
naturally cowards, the fear of death is overcome only by 
the fear of punishment, and this produces in the soul a 


LETTER XC. 


3 * 


new kind of terror which stupifies it; the former, on the 
other hand, go where the blows are thickest, and fear is 
driven out by a feeling of satisfaction which is superior 
to it. 

“ But the sanctuary of honour, of reputation, and of 
virtue, appears to be established in republics, and in 
countries where one dare pronounce the word Father- 
land. In Rome, in Athens, in Lacedsemonia, honour 
was the sole reward for the most distinguished services. 
A crown of oak or of laurel, a statue, a panegyric, was 
a magnificent recompense for a battle gained or a city 
taken. 

“There a man who had performed a brave deed 
thought the deed itself sufficient recompense. He could 
not behold one of his countrymen without a feeling of 
pleasure at having been his benefactor ; he reckoned the 
number of his services by that of his fellow-citizens. 
Every man is capable of benefiting another, but he who 
contributes to the happiness of a whole community re¬ 
sembles the gods. 

“ Now, must not this noble emulation be quite extinct 
in the hearts of you Persians, with whom office and 
honour are derived only from the caprice of the sove¬ 
reign? Reputation and virtue are looked upon as 
imaginary, if unaccompanied by the favour of the prince 
with whom is their sole beginning and end. A man who 
enjoys public esteem is never sure that the morrow may 
not bring forth dishonour. To-day he is a general of the 
army; to-morrow, perhaps, the prince makes him his 


32 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


cook, and leaves him with no hope of any other eulogy 
than that of having made a good ragout.” 

Paris, the 15th of the second moon of 
Gemmadi, 1715.
