Letter XIV. 

USBEK TO THE SAME. 

As their numbers increased every day, the Troglodites 
thought it behoved them to elect a king. They judged it 
wise to confer the crown upon the justest man among 
them; and their thoughts turned to one, venerable by 
reason of his age and his long career of virtue. He, how¬ 
ever, had refused to attend the meeting, and withdrew to 
his house, oppressed with grief. 

When deputies were sent to him to announce his elec¬ 
tion, “The Gods forbid,”cried he, “that I should wrong 
the Troglodites by permitting them to believe that there 
is no man among them more just than I! You offer me 
the crown; and if you insist upon it absolutely, I cannot 
but take it. Remember, however, that I shall die of 
sorrow, having known the Troglodites freemen, to behold 
them subjected to a ruler.” Having said this, he burst 


LETTER XIV. 


39 


into a torrent of tears. “ Unhappy day !” he exclaimed. 
“ Why have I lived to see it ? ” Then he upbraided 
them. “ I see,” he cried, “ O Troglodites, what moves 
you to this ; uprightness becomes a burden to you. In 
your present condition, having no head, you are con¬ 
strained in your own despite to be virtuous: otherwise 
your very existence would be at stake, and you would re¬ 
lapse into the wretched state of your ancestors. But this 
seems to you too heavy a yoke; you would rather be¬ 
come the subjects of a king, and submit to laws of his 
framing—laws less exacting than your present customs. 
You know that then you would be able to satisfy your 
ambition, and while away the time in slothful luxury; 
and that, provided you avoided the graver crimes, there 
would be no necessity for virtue.” He ceased speaking 
for a little, and his tears fell faster than ever. “And what 
do you expect of me ? How can I lay commands upon 
a Troglodite? Would one act more nobly because I 
ordered him ? You forget that a Troglodite without any 
command does what is right from natural inclination ? 

“ 0 Troglodites, my days are nearly done, my blood is 
frozen in my veins, I shall soon join your blessed 
ancestors; why would you have me carry them the sad 
news that you have submitted to another law than that of 
virtue ? ” 

Erzeroum, the loth of the second moon 
of Gemmadi, 1711. 


40 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
