Letter LXXX VII. 

Rica to * * * 

It seems that every member of a family in this country 
controls his own actions. The authority exercised by a 
husband over his wife, a father over his children, a 
master over his slaves, is merely nominal. The law inter¬ 
feres in all differences; and you may be certain that it is 
always against the jealous husband, the sorrowing father, 
the exasperated master. 

The other day I visited the place where justice is 
administered. Before getting there, I had to run the 
gauntlet of a crowd of young shopwomen who press you 
to buy in a most seductive manner. At first, the sight is 
sufficiently amusing; but it becomes dismal when one 


LETTER LXXXV11. 


25 

enters the great halls, where all the people wear dresses 
even more solemn than their faces. At last one comes 
to the sacred place where all the secrets of families are 
revealed and the most hidden actions brought to light. 

Here a modest girl comes to confess the torments of a 
virginity too long preserved, her struggles and her pain¬ 
ful resistance ; she is so little proud of her victory that 
she is always on the verge of accepting defeat; and, in 
order that her father may no longer be ignorant of her 
wants, she exposes them to everybody. 1 

Then some shameless woman appears to publish the 
injuries she has done her husband, as a reason for a 
separation. 

With equal modesty another comes to declare that she 
is tired of wearing the title, without enjoying the rights of 
a wife; she reveals the hidden mysteries of the marriage 
night ; she wishes to be examined by the most skilful 
experts, and prays for a decision re-establishing her in all 
the rights of virginity. Some even dare to challenge 
their husbands, and demand from them a public contest 
which the presence of witnesses renders so difficult; a 
test as disgraceful for the wife who passes it, as for the 
husband who fails to stand it. 

A great number of young women, ravished or seduced, 
represent the men as being much worse than they are. 
This court resounds with love; nothing is talked of but 

1 According to a law derived from the Romans, in the southern 
provinces of France daughters could compel their fathers to dower 
them. (See Letter CXXV.) 


II. 


E 


26 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


enraged fathers, deluded daughters, faithless lovers, 
afflicted husbands. 

According to the law which here holds sway, every 
infant born in wedlock is considered the husband’s; 
should he have good reasons to believe it not his, the 
law believes it for him, and relieves him of his scruples 
and of the necessity for inquiry. 

In this tribunal judgment goes by the majority; but it 
is said that experience teaches that it would be wiser to 
follow the decision of the minority; which is natural 
enough, for there are very few just minds, and plenty of 
ill-balanced ones, as all the world knows. 

Paris, the 1st of the second moon of 
Gemmadi, 1715.
