Letter LXXXIV. 

USBEK TO RHEDI, AT VENICE. 

If there is a God, my dear Rhedi, He must of necessity 
be just; because, if He were not so, He would be the 
worst and most imperfect of all beings. 

Justice is a true relation existing between two things; 
a relation which is always the same, whoever contem¬ 
plates it, whether it be God, or an angel, or lastly, man 
himself. 

It is true that men do not always perceive these rela¬ 
tions : often indeed, when they do perceive them, they 
turn aside from them, their own interest being always 
that which they perceive most clearly. Justice cries 
aloud; but her voice is hardly heard in the tumult of the 
passions. 

Men act unjustly, because it is their interest to do so, 
and because they prefer their own satisfaction to that of 
others. They act always to secure some advantage to 
themselves : no one is a villain gratis; there is always a 
determining motive, and that motive is always an in¬ 
terested one. 

But it is not possible that God should ever commit an 
injustice. As soon as we grant that He perceives what 
is right, it becomes necessary that He should follow it: 
were it not so, as He has no need of anything and is 
sufficient to Himself, He would be the most wicked of 
all beings, having no motive for wickedness. 


LETTER LXXXIV. 


>9 


And so, even if there were no God, we ought always to 
love righteousness; that is to say, we should endeavour 
to resemble that Being of whom we have so lofty an idea, 
and who, if He did exist, would of necessity be righteous. 
Freed as we would be from the yoke of religion, we 
would still be bound by that of justice. 

Here you have, Rhedi, that which makes me believe 
that justice is eternal and independent of human condi¬ 
tions. And, if it were dependent on them, it would be a 
truth so terrible that we would be compelled to hide it 
from ourselves. 

We are surrounded by men stronger than ourselves; 
they can injure us in a thousand different ways, and with 
impunity three times out of four : what a satisfaction it 
is for us to know that there is in the heart of all men, an 
innate principle which fights in our favour, and shields 
us from their attempts! 

Without that we would be in continual terror; we 
would move among men as among lions; and we would 
never feel sure for an instant of our property, our honour, 
and our lives. 

All these considerations incense me against those 
doctors who represent God as a being who makes a 
tyrannical use of His power; who make Him act in a 
manner which we would ourselves eschew for fear of 
offending Him; who charge Him with all the imper¬ 
fections which He punishes in us; and who, in their 
inconsistency, represent Him, now as a malicious being, 
and now as a being who hates evil and punishes it. 


20 


PERSIAN LETTERS . 


When a man examines himself, what a satisfaction for 
him it is to find that he has a righteous heart! That 
delight, austere as it is, should ravish him: he perceives 
that he is a being as far above those who have it not, as 
he is above tigers and bears. Yes, Rhedi, were I sure of 
following always and inviolably that idea of righteousness 
which I have before my eyes, I would believe myself the 
best of men. 

Paris, the 1st of the first moon of 
Gemmadi, 1715.
