Letter CXX. 

USBEK TO THE SAME. 

The fertility of a people depends sometimes on the most 
trifling circumstances in the world; so that often nothing 
more is necessary to increase its numbers than to give a 
new direction to its imagination. 

The Jews, always being exterminated, and always in¬ 
creasing again, have repaired their continual losses and 
destructions by the single hope, shared by all their fami¬ 
lies, that from one of them shall spring a powerful king 
who will be the master of the world. 

The ancient kings of Persia had such an immense 
number of subjects, simply because of that dogma of the 
Magian religion which declares that the deeds of men 
most acceptable to God are to beget a child, to till a field, 
and to plant a tree. 

If the population of China is so enormous, it is only the 
result of a certain way of thinking; for since children 
look upon their parents as gods, reverence them as such 
in this life, and honour them after death with sacrifices by 
means of which they believe that their souls, absorbed 
into Tyen , 1 recommence a new existence, each one is bent 
on increasing a family so dutiful in this life, and so neces¬ 
sary for the next. 

On the other hand, the Mohammedan countries be¬ 
come daily more deserted, because of a belief, all- 
1 The heaven of the Chinese. 


LETTER CXXL 


95 


hallowed as it is, which fails not of most baneful effects 
when it is deeply rooted in the mind. We look upon 
ourselves as travellers, who ought to think only of another 
country : useful and lasting works, care to make provision 
for our children, projects which look beyond our own 
short and fleeting lives, seem to us somewhat absurd. 
Easy minded as regards the present, and without anxiety 
for the future, we trouble neither to repair public build¬ 
ings, to reclaim waste lands, nor to cultivate those which 
are suited for tillage; we live generally in a state of 
indifference, and allow Providence to do everything. 

It is a spirit of vanity which established in Europe the 
unjust law of primogeniture, so unfavourable to propaga¬ 
tion in that it fastens the attention of the father upon one 
of his children, and turns his eyes from all the others, 
forcing him in order to make a substantial fortune for one 
to prevent the settlement of several; and lastly, in that it 
destroys equality among citizens, which constitutes all 
their wealth. 

Paris, the 4th of the moon of 
Rhamazan, 1718.
