Hyperion to Bellarmin [I]

The beloved soil of my fatherland gives me joy and grief once more.

I’m up now every morning on the heights of the Isthmus of Corinth,
and often, like the bee from flower to flower, my spirit flits back and
forth between the seas to right and left that cool the feet of my glowing
mountains.

One of those two gulfs would specially have delighted me, had I
stood here some thousand years ago.

Then, like a conquering demi-god between the glorious wilderness
of Helicon and Parnassus, where the rosy light of dawn plays on a
hundred snow-covered peaks, and the paradisal plain of Sicyon, the
shining gulf surged in towards the city of joy, youthful Corinth, pouring
forth before its favourite the accumulated bounty from all corners of the
earth.

But what is that to me? The howl of the jackal, singing its wild dirge
amidst the rubble of antiquity, jolts me from my dreams.

Happy the man for whom a flourishing fatherland gladdens and
fortifies the heart! Being reminded of mine is like being pitched into the
mire, like having the coffin lid slammed shut over me, and whenever
anyone calls me Greek, I always feel I’m being throttled with a dog
collar.

And see, my Bellarmin! whenever I’d burst out with such remarks, as
often as not with tears of anger in my eyes, along came the wise gentlemen
who so delight in gibbering among you Germans, those wretches for
whom a grieving disposition is such a welcome opportunity to unload

their maxims; they were in their element, and made so bold to tell me:
‘Don’t moan, act!’
Oh, that I had never acted! how many hopes I’d now be richer by! —
Yes, just forget that men exist, starving, vexed and deeply harassed
heart! and return whence you came, into the arms of nature, never-
changing, beautiful and tranquil.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [II]

Ihave nothing I might truly call my own.

Far away and dead are those I loved, and through no voice I hear
from them, nothing ever more.

My business on earth is done. I set about my work with a will, bled
over it, and made the world not a penny richer.

I return alone and unrenowned and wander through my fatherland,
stretching about me like a vast graveyard, and it may be that what
awaits me is the knife of the hunter who keeps us Greeks for sport like
forest game.

But you still shine, sun of heaven! You still green, holy earth! Still the
rivers rush into the sea, and shady trees whisper in the height of day.
Spring’s blissful song sings my mortal thoughts to sleep. The plenitude
of the all-living world nourishes and fills with drunkenness my starving
spirit.

O blissful nature! I can’t tell what comes over me when I lift up my
eyes before your beauty, but all the joy of heaven is in the tears I weep
before you, the lover before the beloved.

My whole being stills and listens when the gentle ripple of the breeze
plays about my breast. Often, lost in the immensity of blue, I look up
into the aether and out into the hallowed sea, and it’s as if a kindred
spirit opened its arms to me, as if the pain of isolation were dissolved in
the life of the godhead.

To be one with everything, that is the life of the godhead, that is the
heaven of man.

To be one with everything that lives, to return in blissful self-oblivion
into the all of nature, that is the summit of thoughts and joys, that is the
holy mountain pinnacle, the place of eternal peace where noon loses its
sultriness and the thunder its voice and the boiling sea becomes like a
waving corn-field.

To be one with everything that lives! At these words virtue lays aside
its wrathful harness, the mind of man its sceptre, and all thoughts melt
away before the vision of the world’s eternal oneness like the toiling
artist’s rules before his heavenly Urania, and iron fate renounces its
dominion, and from the covenant of beings death disappears, and
indivisibility and eternal youth blesses, makes beautiful the world.

On this height I often stand, my Bellarmin! But a moment of reflection
casts me down. I begin to think, and find myself as I was before, alone,
with all the pains of mortality, and my heart’s sanctuary, the world’s
eternal oneness, is no more; nature’s arms are closed, and I stand before
her like a stranger and cannot comprehend her.

Oh! had I never gone into your schools. It’s learning that lured me
down into the pit, in my youthful folly I thought to find in it the proof
of my pure joy, and it has ruined everything for me.

Amongst you I became so very rational, learnt to distinguish myself
perfectly from what is around me, and now I’m set apart in the beautiful
world, expelled from the garden of nature in which I grew and bloomed,
and shrivel under the noonday sun.

Oh, man is a god when he dreams, a beggar when he thinks, and
when inspiration’s gone he’s left standing there like a delinquent son,
cast out of the house by his father, staring at the pitiful pennies given as
alms to help him on his way.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [III]

I thank you for asking me to tell you about myself, for making me
remember former times.

That’s what really drove me back to Greece, wanting to live nearer to
the playground of my youth.

As into quickening sleep the labourer, so my beleaguered being
often sinks into the arms of the innocent past.

Peace of childhood! heavenly peace! how often do I stilly stand before
you in loving contemplation, and think to grasp you! Yet we can only
conceive of that which once was bad and has been made good again; of
childhood, innocence we can have no conception.

When I was still a tranquil child, knowing nought of all that is around
us, was Inot then more than I am now, after all the heart’s travail and all
the mind’s toiling and striving?

Yes! a divine being is the child as long as it’s not been dipped in the
chameleon colours of men.

It’s wholly what it is and that’s why it’s so beautiful.

The force of law and fate can’t touch it; in the child alone is freedom.

In the child is peace; it’s not yet at variance with itself. Richness is in
the child; it’s still to know its heart, the penury of life. It is immortal, for
it knows nothing of death.

But this men cannot bear. That which is divine must become like one
of them, must learn that they too are there, and before nature expels the
child from its paradise, men cajole and drag it out onto the ground of
the curse, that it may, like them, grind away its life in the sweat of its
face.

But the time of awakening is beautiful too, if only we’re not woken
out of season.

Oh, they are hallowed days in which our heart first tests its wings,
when full of quick and fervent growth we stand there in the glorious
world, like the young plant when it unfolds to the morning sun and
stretches up its slender arms towards the endless heaven.

How I felt impelled to roam amongst the mountains and along the
shore! oh, how I often sat with throbbing heart upon the heights of Tinos,
and gazed after the falcons and the cranes, and the doughty sprightly
ships as they shrank below the horizon! ‘Down there!’ I thought, ‘down
there you too one day will wander,’ and I felt like one who, parched
with heat, plunges into the cooling pool and splashes the spumy waters
on his brow.

Sighing I’d then turn back towards my home. ‘If only my school
years were over,’ I often thought.

Dear boy! They’re far from over yet.

That in man’s youth he thinks the goal so near! That is the most
beautiful of all illusions with which nature helps our weakness.

And often when I lay amongst the flowers and basked in the soft
spring sunlight, and looked up into the bright blue that embraced the
warm earth, when I sat under the elms and willows, in the womb of
the mountain, after a quickening shower, when the branches still
quivered from the caresses of heaven and golden clouds moved above
the dripping woods, or when full of peaceful spirit the evening star
rose with those ancient youths, the other heroes of the heavens, and
I watched as the life within them propelled itself through the aether

in eternal effortless order, and the peace of the world enfolded and
elated me, so that I roused and listened, not knowing what came over
me — ‘do you love me, good father in heaven!’ I’d then silently ask, and
felt so blissful and sure his answer in my heart.

O you whom I'd invoke as if you were above the stars, whom I called
creator of heaven and earth, amiable idol of my childhood, you won't be
angry I’ve forgotten you! — Why is the world not so wanting as to make
one seek an entity outside it??

Oh, if she’s the daughter of a father, glorious nature, is the daughter’s
heart not his heart? her inmost self, is it not He? But do I possess it then?
do I know it then?

It’s as if I saw, but then again I take fright, as if it were my own image
I'd seen, it’s as if I felt him, the spirit of the world, like the warm hand
of a friend, but I awake and think it’s my own fingers I’ve been holding.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [IV]

Do you know how Plato and his Stella loved each other?

That’s how I loved, how I was loved. Oh, I was a lucky lad!

It’s a joy when like and like are joined, but when a great man raises
lesser to his level, it’s divine.

A kindly word from a brave man’s heart, a smile that conceals the
consuming glory of the spirit, is little and much, like a magical password
hiding life and death in its innocent syllable, like living water welling
up from deep inside the mountains and conveying to us in each crystal
drop the secret energy of the earth.

But how I hate all the barbarians who think themselves wise because
they no longer have a heart, all the vulgar brutes who find a thousand
different ways to kill and destroy youth’s beauty with their stupid petty
principles of manhood!

Good God! This is the owl wanting to drive from the nest the young
eagles, wanting to show them the way to the sun!

Forgive me, spirit of my Adamas! for recalling these people before
you. That’s what we gain from experience that we can imagine nothing
excellent without its malformed opposite.

2  [Hölderlin’s note] It should go without saying that such utterances, as mere
manifestations of the human mind, ought properly to give no grounds for offence.

Oh, would that you were ever present to me, with all that is akin
to you, grieving demi-god I cherish! Those you enfold with your
tranquillity and strength, conqueror and warrior, those you confront
with your love and wisdom, let them flee or become like you! What's
ignoble and weak stands no chance beside you.

How often you were near to me when you were long since far away
from me, you glorified me with your light, warmed me that my frigid
heart began to stir again, like a frozen stream when it’s touched by the
ray of heaven! Then I felt like fleeing to the stars with my bliss, so that it
not be debased by the world around me.

I'd grown up like an unpropped vine, and the wild tendrils spread
aimlessly across the ground. As you well know, there’s many a noble
energy that perishes with us because it isn’t used. I flitted about like
a will-o’-the-wisp, grasped at everything, was gripped by everything,
but then only for the moment, and my clumsy energies exhausted
themselves to no purpose. Everywhere I felt wanting, and still couldn’t
find my goal. So he found me.

For long enough he’d practised patience and art on his material, the
so-called cultivated world, but his material had been and stayed stone
and wood; it might, when occasion demanded, outwardly assume
the noble human form, but that’s not what my Adamas was about; he
wanted human beings, and to create them he’d found his art too poor.
That those he sought had once existed, those his art was too poor to
create, this he clearly saw. Where they’d existed, he also knew. That’s
where he wished to go, to probe beneath the rubble for their genius and
with it while away his lonely days. He came to Greece. So I found him.

I still see him approaching me in smiling contemplation, I still hear
his greeting and his questions.

Like a plant when its peace soothes the striving spirit and simple
contentment returns to the soul — so he stood before me.

And I, was I not the echo of his quiet inspiration? did the melodies of
his being not reverberate in me? What I saw I became, and it was divine
what I saw.

How feeble is even the most honest human industry compared with
the sheer power of unbroken inspiration.

This doesn’t linger on the surface, doesn’t merely touch us here
or there, has no need of time or means; nor does it need command,

compulsion and conviction; it takes hold of us in one moment on all
sides and on all levels, low and high, and before we know it’s there,
before we can wonder what is coming over us, it turns us through and
through into its blissfulness and beauty.

Happy the man whose path has thus been crossed in early youth by
a noble spirit!

Oh, these are golden unforgettable days, full of the joys of love and
sweet activity!

Adamas led me now into the world of Plutarch’s heroes, now into
the magical land of the Greek gods, now he used number and measure
to bring to my youthful impetuousness order and composure, now he
took me up into the mountains: by day to see the flowers of field and
forest and the wild mosses of the rocks, by night to see the holy stars
above us, and understand them after the manner of men.

There is a luscious feeling of well-being within us when our inner
self can thus draw strength from its material, separating from it to bond
with it more faithfully, and step by step the spirit becomes empowered.

But with threefold force I felt him and myself when, like shades from
the past, in pride and joy, in anger and grief, we journeyed up as far as
Athos and from there shipped eastwards to the Hellespont, then down
to the shores of Rhodes and Taenarum’s mountain chasms, through the
silent islands all; when longing drove us inland from the coasts, into the
sombre heart of ancient Peloponnese, to the lonely banks of the Eurotas,
oh! the desolate valleys of Elis and Nemea and Olympia; when leaning
against a pillar of one of forgotten Jupiter’s temples, hugged by laurel
roses and evergreens, we gazed into the wild riverbed, and the vibrance
of spring and the ever youthful sun reminded us that man too had once
been there and now is gone, that the glorious nature of humanity is barely
there any more, like the fragment of a temple, or in memory as the image
of one dead — then I sat playing sadly beside him, plucking the moss
from a demi-god’s pedestal, digging some hero’s marble shoulder out
of the rubble, and cutting away the brambles and the heather from the
half-buried architraves, whilst my Adamas sketched the landscape that
fondly held the ruins in its comforting embrace, the corn-covered hill,
the olives, the herd of goats clinging to the mountain crag, the forest of
elms sweeping down from the peaks to the valley; and the lizard frisked
at our feet, and the flies buzzed about us in the stillness of noon — Dear

Bellarmin! I’d love to give a point-by-point account in Nestor’s manner;
I range through the past like a gleaner through a field of stubble, when
the lord of the land has reaped; one picks up every piece of straw. And
the time I stood beside him on the heights of Delos, what a day it was
that dawned for me as I climbed with him the ancient marble steps up
Cynthus’ granite face. Here once dwelt the sun-god, amidst the heavenly
festivals where, like golden clouds, assembled Greece glowed all around
him. It’s here the youths of Greece immersed themselves in floods of joy
and inspiration, like Achilles in the Styx, and like the demi-god emerged
invincible. In the groves, in the temples their souls awoke, each sounding
in the other, and all faithfully preserving the rapturous chords.

But why am I speaking of this? As if we still had an inkling of those
days! Oh! not even a beautiful dream can thrive under the curse that
weighs upon us. Like a howling north wind the present blasts the
blossoms of our spirit and sears them in their bloom. And yet it was a
golden day that enfolded me on Cynthus! We reached the summit with
dawn still breaking. Now he rose in his eternal youth, the ancient sun-
god; serene and effortless as ever, the immortal titan with a thousand
joys of his own soared upward, smiling down on his wasted land, on
his temples, his pillars that fate had tossed before him like withered
rose petals, mindlessly ripped from the bush by a passing child and
scattered over the earth.

‘Be like him!’ Adamas cried out to me, grasped my hand and held it
out towards the god, and I felt as if the morning winds were carrying
us away, bringing us into the train of the holy being that now rose up to
the summit of heaven, kindly and grand, and wonderfully infused the
world and us with his spirit and his power.

Still my inmost self grieves and rejoices over every word Adamas
spoke to me then, and I can’t understand my privation when often I
feel as he must have then. What is loss when man thus finds himself in
a world which is his own? In us is everything. If a hair should fall from
his head, what is it to him? Why does man so strive for bondage when
he could be a god! ‘You will be lonely, my dearest!’ Adamas also said
to me then, ‘you will be like a crane, left behind by his kin in the harsh
season whilst they seek out the spring in distant lands.’

And there you have it, dear friend! That’s what makes us poor for
all our wealth, that we cannot be alone, that as long as we live the love

within us will not die. Give me back my Adamas, and come with all my
kindred that amongst us may renew itself the ancient world of beauty,
that together we may gather and commingle in the arms of our godhead,
nature, and you will see, then I'll know nothing of need.

But let no one say it’s fate that parts us! It’s we, we ourselves who
do it! we take our delight in plunging into the night of the unknown,
into the cold alien terrain of some other world, and were it possible,
we would quit the sun’s realm and storm beyond the bounds of our
wandering star. Alas! for man’s wild breast there can be no home;
and as the sun’s ray sears the plants of earth it first unfolded, so man
murders the sweet flowers that flourished at his breast, the joys of
kinship and of love.

I might seem to bear a grudge against my Adamas for leaving me,
but I bear him no grudge. Oh, he was going to return!

Hidden in the depths of Asia there’s said to be a people of rare virtue;
it’s thither he was driven by his hopes.

I kept him company as far as Nios. Those were bitter days. I’ve learnt
to suffer pain, but have no strength in me for such a parting.

With every moment that brought us closer to the final hour emerged
more clearly how this man was woven into my being. As a dying man
to his fleeing breath, so clove my soul to him.

At Homer’s grave we passed a few more days, and Nios became for
me the most hallowed of the islands.

Finally we tore ourselves away. My heart had worn itself weary. By
the last moment I was calmer. I lay on my knees before him, clasped him
for the last time in these arms: ‘Give me a blessing, my father!’ I softly
cried up to him, and he smiled grandly, and his brow widened before the
stars of morning, and his eye pierced the spaces of heaven — ‘Preserve
him for me,’ he cried, ‘you spirits of a better time! and raise him to your
immortality, and all you friendly powers of heaven and earth, be with
him!’

‘There is a god in us,’ he added more calmly, ‘who steers our fate
like rivers of water, and all things are his element. Be this god with you
above all!’

So we parted. Farewell, my Bellarmin!

Hyperion to Bellarmin [V]

Whither could I flee from myself, had I not the dear days of my
youth?

Like a spirit that finds no rest by Acheron, I revisit the deserted
scenes of my life. All things age and renew themselves. Why are we
excluded from nature’s beautiful cycle? Or does it hold for us too?

I'd gladly believe it, but for one thing in us that boils up from the
depths of our being like the titan in Etna, the monstrous striving to be
everything.

And yet who’d not rather feel it in himself like seething oil than own
that he was born for the yoke and the whip? Which is nobler: a rampant
battle-steed or a droopy-eared nag?

Dear friend! there was a time when my breast too basked in great
hopes, when for me too the joy of immortality throbbed in every pulse,
when I would wander amid grand designs as if in some vast sylvan
night, when, like the fish of the ocean, I’d happily press on and ever
onwards in my shoreless future.

How boldly, blissful nature! did the youth leap from your cradle!
how he rejoiced in his untested arms! His bow was ready strung and his
arrows rustled in the quiver, and the immortals, the sublime spirits of
antiquity, were his leaders, and his Adamas was in their midst.

Wherever I was or went, these glorious forms kept me company;
like flames heroic deeds from all the ages mingled in my mind, and
just as those gigantic shapes, the clouds of heaven, merge together into
one exultant storm, so merged in me the hundredfold triumphs of the
Olympiads, became one single endless triumph.

Who can withstand it, who is not floored by the terrible glory of
antiquity, like young woods flattened by a hurricane, when it seizes him
as I was seized, and when, like me, he lacks the element in which to gain
a firming sense of self?

Oh, like a storm the greatness of the ancients surely bowed my head,
it blasted the bloom from my cheek, and often I would lie where no eye
could see me, under a thousand tears, like a fallen fir when it lies by the
stream and hides its withered crown beneath the waters. How gladly I’d
have bought with blood a moment from a great man’s life!

But what help to me was that? The fact is, no one wanted me.

Oh, it’s pitiful to see oneself so crushed; and let him who finds this
hard to understand not trouble himself further, and give his thanks to
nature for having like the butterflies created him for joy, and go and in
his life speak nevermore of misery and pain.

I loved my heroes as a fly loves the light; I’d seek their dangerous
nearness and flee from it and seek it out again.

Like a bleeding hart into the stream, I would often plunge headlong
into the whirlpool of joy, to cool my burning breast and wash away the
glorious raving dreams of fame and greatness, but what help was that?

And often when at midnight my heated heart drove me down into
the garden beneath the dewy trees, and the burn’s lullaby and the balmy
breeze and the moonlight soothed my senses, and so tranquil and free
the silver clouds above me stirred, and the ebbing voice of the surging
sea sounded faintly from afar, how fondly all its love’s great phantoms
played then with my heart!

‘Farewell, you heavenly ones!’ I often spoke in spirit, when over me
the softly sounding melody of morning’s light began, ‘you glorious
dead, farewell! Could I only follow you, shake off all this age has given
me and set forth into the freer realm of the shades!’

But I languish parched in my chains and snatch with bitter joy the
beggarly bowl that’s offered for my thirst.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [VI]

My island had grown too strait for me since Adamas’s leaving. I’d
been bored in Tinos for years. I wanted to get out into the world.

‘Go first to Smyrna,’ said my father, ‘learn there the arts of
seamanship and war, learn the speech of polished peoples, learn about
their constitutions and opinions and manners and customs, prove all
things and hold fast the best! — Then for my part go on as you will.’

‘Learn a little patience too,’ my mother added, and I accepted the
advice and thanked her for it.

It’s rapturous to take the first step beyond the bounds of youth, and
when I look back to my parting from Tinos, it’s like thinking of the day

of my birth. There was a new sun above me, and I relished land and sea
and air as if for the first time.

The living activity with which I now pursued my education in
Smyrna, and my rapid progress, did much to soothe my heart. And
from this time I can recall many a blissful evening, my labours done.
How often would I stroll beneath the evergreen trees on the banks of the
Meles, by the birthplace of my Homer, and pick sacrificial flowers and
cast them into the hallowed stream! Then in my peaceful dreams I trod
the path to the nearby grotto where, they say, the venerable poet sang
his Iliad. I found him. Every sound in me stilled before his presence. I
opened his divine poem and it was as if I’d never known it, so wholly
new the way it came alive in me now.

I also have fond memories of roaming through the country around
Smyrna. It’s a glorious land, and a thousand times I’ve wished for wings
to fly just once a year to Asia Minor.

From the plain of Sardis I made my way up through the crags of
Tmolus.

I'd spent the night in a friendly hut at the mountain’s foot, amid
myrtles, amidst the fragrance of the rockrose bush, with the swans
playing beside me in the golden waters of the Pactolus, and an ancient
temple of Cybele, like a bashful ghost, glancing out from between the
elms into the bright moonlight. Five lovely pillars stood mourning over
the rubble, and a regal portal lay toppled at their feet.

Now through a thousand blooming bushes my path grew upwards.
From the craggy slope whispering trees bowed, showering their
gossamer flakes on my head. I'd set out in the morning. By noon Id
reached the crest of the range. I stood there, gladly gazing, relishing the
purer airs of heaven. Those were blissful hours.

The land from which I'd climbed lay before me like a sea, youthful,
full of living joy; it was with a heavenly unending play of colours that
spring greeted my heart, and as the sun of heaven found itself again in
the thousandfold changes of light given back to it by the earth, so my
spirit knew itself in the fullness of life embracing it, besieging it from
every side.

To the left the torrent, exulting like a giant, plunged down into the
woods from the marble cliff that beetled above me, where the eagle
played with its young and the snowy peaks glistened up into the blue

aether; to the right storm clouds came rolling over the forests of Mount
Sipylus; I didn’t feel the gale that carried them, only the breath of a
breeze in my hair, but I heard their thunder, as one hears the voice of
the future, and I saw their flames like the distant light of dimly sensed
divinity. I turned to the south and wandered on. There it lay open before
me, the whole paradisal landscape through which the Cayster flows
with many a charming wimple, as if it couldn’t linger long enough
amidst all the affluence and loveliness surrounding it. Like the zephyrs
my spirit fluttered blissfully from beauty to beauty, from the nameless
peaceful hamlet, huddled deep below at the foot of the mountain, out to
where the range of Messogis looms.

I returned to Smyrna like a drunk man from a banquet. My heart was
too full of delights for me not to endow mortality with something of its
surplus. I’d too happily absorbed as bounty nature’s beauty for me not
to fill with it the gaps in human life. My shabby Smyrna was clothed in
the colours of my inspiration and stood there like a bride. I found myself
attracted by the sociable city-dwellers. The absurdity in their manners
amused me like a child’s buffoonery, and since I was by nature beyond
all their established forms and customs, I toyed with them all, donning
and doffing them like carnival costumes.

But what really added spice for me to the vapid fare of everyday
communion were those good faces and figures that merciful nature here
and there still sends like stars into our darkness.

What hearty joy I took in them! how full of faith I read those friendly
hieroglyphics! But it was much like my erstwhile experience with
the birches in spring. I’d heard about the sap of these trees and had
extravagant expectations of the delicious drink their lovely stems must
yield. But it lacked both strength and spirit.

Alas! and how utterly hopeless was everything else I heard and saw.

Sometimes, when I went about among these polished people, it
really seemed to me that human nature had broken down into so
many species of beast. Here, as everywhere, it was the men who were
especially degenerate and corrupt.

There are animals that howl when they hear music. But when talk
turned to beauty of the spirit and youthfulness of heart, my more mannerly
humans laughed. Wolves slink off when someone strikes a light. When
these people saw a spark of reason they’d turn their backs like thieves.

When I spoke the odd warm word of ancient Greece, they yawned
and opined, it was this day and age we had to live in; and another added
weightily, good taste was still alive and well.

And sure enough, this was soon in evidence. One of them japed like
a deckhand, the other puffed out his cheeks and spouted gobbets of
wisdom.

Or there’d be one who’d act enlightened, snap his fingers at heaven
and proclaim: he’d never worried about the birds in the bush, give him
the bird in the hand anytime! Yet mention death to him and he would at
once clasp his hands, and in the course of conversation observe that it’s
a dangerous thing our priests now count for nothing.

The only ones I sometimes had a use for were the tellers of tales,
the walking roll calls of foreign cities and countries, the talking peep
boxes in which one can see spires and market places and potentates on
chargers.

I finally grew weary of throwing myself away, looking for grapes in
a desert and flowers on a field of ice.

I now lived more determinedly alone, and the gentle spirit of my
youth had almost wholly vanished from my soul. The incurableness of
the age had become plain to me from so much I tell and leave untold,
and the beautiful consolation of finding my world in a single soul,
embracing my kind in but one friendly figure, this too was denied me.

Dear friend! what were life without hope? A spark that leaps from
the coal and perishes, and like a gust of wind heard in the dreary season,
it soughs for a moment and then it’s gone — should we think that’s the
way it is with us?

Even the swallow seeks friendlier climes in winter, the hart runs
around in the heat of the day and its eyes seek streams of water. Who
tells the infant its mother won’t withhold her breast? And look! it seeks
it still.

Nothing could live if it had not hope. My heart now locked its
treasures away, but only to keep them safe for better times, for the one,
the holy, the true that at some period of existence should surely meet
my thirsting soul.

How blissfully I’d often cling to it in hours of forefeeling when it
gently played like moonlight around my soothed brow? Already then
I knew you, already then you looked upon me like a spirit from the

clouds, you who’d one day rise for me, in the peacefulness of beauty,
out of the dismal wave of the world! Now this heart would never more
battle and burn.

As a lily sways in a silent breeze, so stirred my being in its element,
in rapturous dreams of her.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [VII]

Smyrna was soured for me now. My heart had grown altogether
weary over time. Now and then the wish might rear in me to wander
round the world, or find some war to fight in, or else seek out my Adamas
and burn away my rancour in his fire; but wish was all it stayed, and my
futile sapless life refused to be refreshed.

Summer was now coming to an end; already I could sense the
dreich dank days and the whistling of the winds and the brawling of
the rain-swollen streams; and nature, which like a foaming fountain
had swelled up in every flower and tree, stood already now before
my darkened mind, dwindling and closed down and turned in upon
itself, like me.

I wanted to take with me what I could of all this fleeting life; all I’d
grown to love without I wanted to make safe within, for well I knew
that the returning year would find me no longer amidst these trees and
mountains; and so now, more than before, I walked and rode about
throughout the region.

But what mainly drove me abroad was the secret longing to catch
sight of one I’d encountered daily for some time, passing beneath the
trees before the city gates.

Like a young titan the glorious stranger strode amongst this race of
pygmies who with timid joy drank in his beauty, sizing up his strength
and stature, feasting with furtive glance upon the glowing bronzed
Roman face, as if upon forbidden fruit; and it was a glorious moment
each time this man’s eye, for whose gaze the vastness of the aether
seemed too small a bound, so laid aside all pride and searched and
strove until it felt itself in mine, and blushingly we passed each other
by, looking all the while.

One day Id ridden deep into the forests of Mount Mimas, and didn’t
turn home till late evening. I’d dismounted and was leading my horse

down a steep, broken path, over tree-roots and stones, and as I wound
my way down through the scrub into the hollow that now opened
before me, I was suddenly set upon by Karaburun robbers, and at first
I struggled to fend off their two drawn sabres, but they were already
weary from other work, and in the end I coped. I calmly got back on my
horse and rode on down.

At the foot of the mountain, amidst the woods and the piled-up
crags, a small glade opened up before me. It grew light. The moon had
just risen over the gloomy trees. From a distance I saw horses stretched
out on the ground and men beside them in the grass.

‘Who are you?’ I called out.

‘That’s Hyperion!’ cried a hero’s voice, joyfully surprised. ‘You know
me,’ the voice went on; ‘I see you every day under the trees by the city
gates.’

My horse flew to him like an arrow. The moonlight shone bright in
his face. I knew him; I jumped down.

‘Good evening!’ cried the gentle strapping fellow, giving me a look
both wild and tender, and his brawny fist squeezed mine and made me
feel his meaning through and through.

Oh, now my bootless life was at an end!

Alabanda — this was the stranger's name — now told me that he
and his servant had been set upon by robbers and the two that I’d
encountered had been sent packing by him, that he’d lost his way out of
the forest and hence had been forced to stay put till I came by. “This has
cost me a friend,’ he added, pointing to his dead horse.

I gave mine to his servant and we proceeded on foot.

‘It serves us right,’ I began, as we made our way out of the forest arm
in arm; ‘why did we have to hold back for so long and pass each other
by, so that it took this misadventure to bring us both together.’

‘But I must tell you,’ replied Alabanda, ‘that you were more to blame,
you were the colder one. I rode after you today.’

‘My glorious friend!’ I cried, ‘just you wait and see! you shall never
surpass me in love.’

Each moment brought us closer, more joyfully together.

As we approached the city we passed a well-built caravansary,
resting amid murmuring fountains and fruit trees and sweet-scented
meadows.

We decided to spend the night there. We sat up late together, with
the windows open. A sublime spirit of stillness enfolded us. Earth and
sea were sunk in blissful silence, like the stars that hung above us. Barely
a breeze floated into the room from the sea and gently played with our
light, and perhaps the more plangent tones of distant music drifted to
us, while the thundercloud lay cradled in the aether’s bed and sounded
fitfully through the stillness from afar, like a slumbering giant when he
sighs more deeply in his dreadful dreams.

Our souls were bound to be all the more powerfully drawn together,
because they’d been unwillingly closed off from one another. We met
like two streams that come rolling down the mountain and hurl aside
the ballast of earth and stones and rotten wood and all the sluggish
mess that holds them back, clearing their way to each other and bursting
through to where, embracing and embraced with equal force, they
mingle into one majestic river and begin their wandering course into
the vastness of the sea.

He, by fate and men’s barbarism driven from hearth and home and
hunted hither and thither amongst strangers, from early youth made
savage and embittered, and yet also with an inner heart full of love, full
of longing to break out of the coarse husk and into a congenial element;
I, so inwardly detached from everything already, so wholly alien and
lonely amongst men, in the dearest melodies of my heart accompanied
so grotesquely by the world’s clanging cymbals; I, for whom the blind
and lame were hated of my soul, yet myself too blind and lame, so
utterly encumbered by all I had in common, be it ever so remotely, with
the sophisticates and pedants, the barbarians and the wiseacres — and
so full of hope, so full of single-hearted expectation of a more beautiful
life —

How could these two youths not rush to embrace each other in
temptestuous joy?

O you, my friend and brother-in-arms, my Alabanda, where are you?
I could believe you’ve gone across into the unknown land, to peace, and
have become again what once we were as children.

Sometimes, when a thunderstorm passes overhead, dispensing its
divine energies on forests and seeded fields, or when the waves of the
surging sea disport themselves, or a chorus of eagles soars around the
mountain peaks where I wander, my heart can stir as if my Alabanda

were not far away; but more visibly, more vividly, more palpably he
lives within me, just as once he stood before me, a fierily stern and
terrible accuser when he rehearsed the sins of the age. How then my
spirit awakened in its depths, how the thundering words of remorseless
justice rolled over my tongue! Like harbingers of Nemesis, our thoughts
scoured the earth and cleansed it till not a trace of any curse remained.

We also summoned the past before our tribunal; proud Rome didn’t
daunt us with its glory, nor Athens seduce us with its youthful bloom.

Like storms when they, exulting and relentless, blast their way
through woods and over mountains, so our souls forged ever onwards
in their colossal projects; not that we, like milksops, brought forth
our world as if by incantation, callowly expecting to encounter no
resistance — Alabanda was too astute and too manful for that. But often
even effortless enthusiasm can be soldierly and shrewd.

One day I recall with particular vividness.

We'd gone together out into the countryside, sat in intimate embrace
in the dusky shade of the evergreen laurel, looking together in our Plato
where he speaks so wonderfully sublimely of ageing and renewal, and
now and then resting our eyes upon the muted leafless landscape where
heaven, more beautifully than ever, with cloud and sunlight played
about the trees in their autumnal sleep.

Then we spoke much of present-day Greece, both with bleeding
hearts, for this same dishonoured soil was fatherland to Alabanda too.

And he was indeed uncommonly moved.

‘When I see a child,’ he cried, ‘and consider how demeaning and
corrupting is the yoke that it will bear, and that it will languish, as
we do, that it will search for human beings, as we do, and ask, as we
do, after the beautiful and the true, that it will fruitlessly waste away
because it will be alone, as we are, that it — O Greeks, just take your
sons from their cradles and cast them into the river, so that at least
they'll be spared your shame!’

‘Surely, Alabanda, things will surely change!’ I said.

‘How’ he retorted; ‘our heroes have lost their fame, our sages their
disciples. Great deeds, without a noble people to heed them, are no
more than a hefty blow to a numb skull, and lofty words that find no
lofty hearts in which to echo are like a dying leaf rustling down into the
dung. What will you do about it?’

‘I will’ I said, ‘take my shovel and fling the dung into a pit. A people
in whom greatness of thought and deed no longer inspires greatness of
thought and deed has nothing more in common with others that still
are human beings, it has forfeited all rights, and it’s an empty farce, a
superstition, to go on reverencing such will-less corpses as if there beat
a Roman heart within them. Away with them! It shall not stand where it
stands, the rotten withered tree, for it steals light and air from the young
life ripening for a new world.’

Alabanda flew to me and hugged me, and his kisses pierced my soul.
‘Comrade’ he cried, ‘dear comrade! Oh, now I’ve got one hundred arms
with which to fight!

‘T hear my melody at last,’ he went on, in a voice that stirred my
heart like a battle cry, ‘and that’s enough for me! They’re glorious words
you've spoken, Hyperion! What? the god shall depend on the worm?
The god in us, for whom the path to infinity beckons, shall stand and
wait till the worm gets out of his way? No! no! We don’t ask whether
you're willing! You never are, you slaves and barbarians! Nor will we
try to change you for the better, for that’s a waste of effort! we just want
to see to it you make way for the triumphant march of man. Oh! let
someone light the torch for me that I may sear the weed from the heath!
let the mine be made for me that I may blast the sluggish clods from the
earth!’

‘Where possible we'll push them gently aside,’ I interjected.

Alabanda was silent for a while.

‘I take my joy in the future,’ he spoke again at last, ardently clasping
both my hands. ‘Thank God! I’ll meet no common end. To be happy is
to be torpid in the mouths of the slaves. To be happy! when I hear you
slaves speak to me of being happy, it’s like having pap and lukewarm
water on the tongue. So fatuous and futile is everything for which you
sacrifice your laurel crowns, your immortality.

‘O holy light that wanders restlessly above us, working throughout
its vast realm, and transmits its soul to me too in the rays that I drink,
may your happiness be mine!

‘The sons of the sun feed on their deeds; it’s by victory they live; with
their own spirit they rouse themselves, and their strength is their joy.’ —

The spirit of this man would often seize you so, you might almost
have been ashamed, feeling yourself so carried away light as a feather.

‘O heaven and earth!’ I cried, ‘that’s what I call joy! — Those are
other times, that’s not a voice from my childish age, that’s not the soil
where men’s hearts heave under the slave driver's whip. — Yes! yes! by
your glorious soul, man! You will save the fatherland with me.’

‘That I will, he cried, ‘or perish.’

From this day on we grew ever holier and dearer to one another.
There was now a deep and ineffable earnestness between us. But we
were only the more blissfully together. Each of us lived only in the
eternal ground tones of his being, and onward we strode without
frills from one great harmony to another. Our common life was full of
glorious rigour and boldness.

‘How is it you’ve become so still?’ Alabanda once asked me smilingly.
‘In the torrid zones,’ said I, ‘nearer the sun, even the birds don’t sing.’

But in this world all things rise and fall, and man with all his giant
strength holds nothing fast. Once I saw a child stretch out its hand to
catch the moonlight; but the light went calmly on its way. So too are we
left standing there, wrestling to hold back wandering fate.

Oh, could we only ponder it as calmly as we watch the stars in their
course!

The happier you are, the less it takes to bring you down, and such
blissful days as Alabanda and I were living are like the peak of a sheer
crag where it needs the merest touch from your companion to send you
abruptly tumbling over the lacerating edges, down into the endless
glooming depths.

We'd taken a glorious trip to Chios, and found a thousand joys in one
another. Like breezes over the surface of the sea, the friendly enchantments
of nature swayed over us. In joyful surprise we looked at one another
without speaking a word, but our eyes were saying, ‘I’ve never seen you
like this before!’ So glorified were we by the powers of earth and heaven.

During the trip we’d argued with bright ardour about a good few
things; this time, as before, my heart had taken its joy in watching this
spirit on his bold erratic course, as he so heedless of all rules, with such
cheerful abandon and yet mostly so sure-footedly pursued his path.

As soon as we were back on land we made haste to be alone.

‘You can’t really convince anyone,’ I now said most lovingly, ‘you
win people over, you beguile them before you begin; when you speak
it’s impossible to doubt, and he who doesn’t doubt isn’t convinced.’

‘Proud flatterer,’ he responded, ‘you lie! but it’s as well that you
remind me! only too often you’ve robbed me of my reason! I wouldn’t
wish to be free from you, not for all the crowns in the world, but yet I
often find it troubling that you should be so indispensable to me, that
I’m so fettered to you; and look,’ he went on, ‘so that you may have
me all, you shall know all about me too! up till now, for all the joy and
glory, we’ve never thought to delve into the past.’

Then he told me of his fate; it was like watching a young Hercules
struggle with Megaera.

‘Will you now forgive me,’ he concluded the tale of his adversities,
‘will you now have more patience if often I’m coarse and rancid and
hard to stomach!’

‘Oh stop, stop!’ I cried, deeply moved; ‘but to think that you're still
here, that you preserved yourself for me!’

‘That’s right! for you!’ he cried, ‘and I’m delighted you yet find me
palatable fare. And though sometimes I might taste to you like a crab,
just keep on pressing me until I’m fit to drink.’

‘Leave me be! leave me be!’ I cried; I resisted in vain; the man made a
child of me; nor did I conceal it from him; he saw my tears, and woe to
him if he shouldn’t have seen them!

‘We're carousing,’ Alabanda now resumed, ‘we're killing time in
drunkenness.”

‘We're having our bridegroom days together,’ I blithely cried, ‘so
why shouldn't it still sound as if we were in Arcadia. — But to return to
what we were discussing earlier!

‘Say what you will, you grant too much power to the state. It may
not demand what it cannot enforce. Yet what love gives, and the spirit,
cannot be enforced. Let it leave that untouched, or we should take its
precious law and nail it to the pillory! By heaven! he little knows how
much he sins who would turn the state into a school of morals. It’s this
that’s always made the state into a hell, that man has tried to make of it
his heaven.

‘The state is the coarse husk round life’s kernel and nothing more.
It’s the wall around the garden of human fruits and flowers.

‘But what help is the wall around the garden when the soil lies
parched? Then all that helps is rainfall from heaven.

‘O rainfall from heaven! O inspiration! You will bring again to us the
springtime of the peoples. The state cannot command you hither. But let
it not hinder you, then you will come, come you will, with your almighty
joys, wreathe us in golden clouds and lift us high above mortality, and
we shall marvel and wonder whether we’re still who we were, we, the
needy who’d ask the stars if a blossoming spring awaited us there — do
you ask me when this shall come to pass? Then when the darling of
time, the youngest, most beautiful daughter of time, the new church
arises from these soiled and worn-out forms, when the wakened feeling
for the divine brings back to man his divinity and beautiful youth to his
breast, when — I can’t proclaim it, for I barely sense it, but it shall surely,
surely come. Death is a herald of life, and that we’re now slumbering in
our sickhouses, that’s a sure sign there'll soon be a healthy awakening.
Then, only then shall we truly be, then is the spirits’ element found!’

Alabanda was silent, and looked at me astonished for a while. I was
rapt with endless hopes; divine energies carried me away like a wisp of
cloud —

‘Come!’ I cried, grasping Alabanda by his garment, ‘come, who can
stand it any longer in the benighted dungeon that surrounds us?’

‘Whither, my drunken dreamer?’ answered Alabanda dryly, and a
shade of derision seemed to pass across his face.

I felt that I’d been flung down from the clouds. ‘Go!’ I said, ‘you’re a
little man!’

At that moment several strangers entered the room, striking figures,
mostly gaunt and pale, as far as I could tell in the moonlight, and calm,
but there was something in their mien that pierced the soul like a sword,
and it was like standing in the presence of omniscience; one might have
doubted whether these were the aspects of needy natures, had not
murdered feeling left behind its traces here and there.

One I found particularly striking. The stillness of his features was the
stillness of a battlefield. Within this man wrath and love had raged, and
intelligence beamed out above the wreckage of his heart like the eye of
a hawk, perched on palace ruins. Deep contempt lay on his lips. One
sensed it was no trivial purpose that engaged this man.

Another more likely owed his calm to natural hardness of heart. He
displayed barely any trace of violence, either freely willed or inflicted
by fate.

A third could rather have wrung from life his coldness by force of
conviction, and often be at war still with himself, for there was a lurking
contradiction in his being; to me he seemed to feel the need to keep
himself in check. He had the least to say.

As soon as they came in Alabanda leapt up like sprung steel.

‘We’ve been looking for you,’ one of them cried.

‘You'd find me,’ he said laughingly, ‘if I hid myself in the centre of
the earth. They’re my friends,’ he added, turning towards me.

They seemed to eye me rather sharply.

‘Here’s another keen to see the world a better place,’ cried Alabanda
in a while, pointing to me.

‘Are you serious about that?’ asked one of the three.

‘Bettering the world is no joking matter,’ I said.

‘You've said a great deal in few words!’ cried one of them in his turn.
‘You're our man!’ another.

‘You think that way too?’ I asked.

‘Ask us what we do!’ was the response.

‘And if I asked?’

‘Then we’d tell you we’re here to clean up the earth, that we clear the
stones from the field, and break the hard clods with the mattock, and
dig furrows with the plough, and seize the tares by the roots, cut them
through at the roots, rip them out with the roots, that they may wither
away in the searing sun.’

‘Not that we expect to reap,’ another interjected, ‘for us the reward
will come too late; we shall not live to see the harvest ripen.

‘We're in the evening of our days. We erred often, hoped much and
achieved little. We liked to take more risks than time to think. We were
eager to be quickly done and trusted to good fortune. We spoke much
of joy and pain, and loved and hated both. We played with fate and it
did the same with us. From beggar’s staff to crown it tossed us up and
down. It swung us as one swings a glowing censer, and we glowed till
the coals turned to ash. We’ve ceased to speak of fortune good or ill.
We've grown beyond life’s middle where all is green and warm. But
that which outlives youth is not the worst. It’s from hot metal the cold
sword is forged. And they say that burnt-out dead volcanoes yield no
mean young wine.’

‘It’s not for our sakes we say this,’ cried another now more urgently,
‘it’s for your sakes we say it! We don’t go begging for men’s hearts.
We don’t need their hearts, their wills. For there’s no way they can be
against us, for everything is for us, and the foolish and the prudent
and the simple and the wise and all vices and all virtues of crudity and
culture are in our service without hire, and help us blindly on towards
our goal — only we would wish that there be some to savour what we
do, and so, from amongst the thousand blind helpers, we select the best
that we may turn them into seeing helpers — but if no one wants to
dwell where we have built, it’s not our fault and not our loss. We did
our part. If no one wants to gather where we ploughed, who will blame
us for that? Who will curse the tree when its apple falls into the mire?
I’ve often told myself, “you're offering to corruption,” and still went on
to finish my day’s work.’

‘These are impostors!’ all the walls cried out to my quickened sense.
I felt like one about to suffocate in smoke, who smashes doors and
windows to get out, so did I thirst for air and freedom.

And soon they saw how ill at ease I was and broke off. Day was
already dawning when I stepped out of the caravansary where we’d
been together. I felt the breath of the morning breeze like balsam on a
burning wound.

I was already too riled by Alabanda’s derision for his mysterious
connections not to make me lose all faith in him now.

‘He’s bad,’ I cried, ‘yes, he’s bad. He feigns unbounded openness
and consorts with men like these — and conceals it from you.’

I felt like a bride when she learns her beloved is secretly living with
a whore.

Oh, this was not the kind of pain one likes to nurse, holding it to one’s
heart like a child, singing it to slumber with the tones of the nightingale!

Like a wrathful serpent when it climbs remorselessly up knees and
loins, enwinding every limb, and sinks its venomed fangs now into
breast, now into nape, so was my pain, so did it grip me in its terrible
embrace. I summoned my highest heart for help and strove for noble
thoughts so as to still hold back, and for a few moments too it worked,
but now I’d also found the strength for rage, and now, like a malicious
blaze, I killed each spark of love within me.

‘He must,’ I thought, * — these are his people after all — he must be
conspiring with them against you! What did he want with you anyway?
What could he have looked for in you, the dreamer? Oh, had he but
gone his way! But then they get their peculiar pleasure in taking on
their opposite! having such a strange beast in their stable suits them just
fine!’ —

And yet I’d been ineffably happy with him, had so often sunk in
his embrace and emerged with heart invincible, so often like steel been
tempered and purged in his fire!

When once on a serene midnight I pointed out to him the Dioscuri,
and Alabanda laid his hand on my heart and said: ‘Those are mere stars,
Hyperion, mere letters with which the names of the heroic brothers are
written in the heavens; it’s in us they are! living and true, with their
courage and their divine love, and you, you are the son of the god and
share your immortality with your mortal Castor!’ —

When I roamed with him through the forests of Ida, and we descended
down into the valley to ask the silent burial mounds about their dead,
and I said to Alabanda that amongst the mounds one perhaps belonged
to the spirit of Achilles and his beloved friend, and Alabanda confessed
to me that he was often a child and imagined our one day falling in a
single vale of battle and resting together beneath a single tree — who
would have thought then that it would come to this?

I turned it over and over with all the strength of mind that I had left,
I accused him, I defended him, and accused him the more bitterly again;
I struggled against my mood and tried to cheer myself, only for all my
efforts to end in utter gloom.

Alas! my eye had been left red and raw from many a hefty blow
and was hardly even beginning to heal, how should it now see more
soundly?

Alabanda visited me next day. My heart seethed when he came in,
but I restrained myself, however much I was nettled and angered by his
pride and his composure.

‘The air is glorious,’ he finally said, ‘and it will be a very beautiful
evening, let’s walk up to the acropolis together.’

I agreed. For a long time no word was spoken. ‘What is it you want?’
I asked at last.

‘You can ask me that?’ replied this savage spirit with a sorrow that
pierced my soul. I was taken aback, confounded.

‘What am I to think of you?’ I began again at last.

‘Think me what I am!’ he answered calmly.

‘You need to make apology,’ I said in a changed voice, looking at him
proudly, ‘absolve yourself! cleanse yourself!’

That was too much for him.

‘How can it be,’ he cried indignantly, ‘that this fellow should bend
me to his every whim? — It’s true, they’d let me out of school too early,
Id dragged all the chains and torn them all asunder, there was just one
I'd missed, only one still left to smash, I hadn’t yet been chastised by a
fantast — go on, murmur all you like! I’ve kept silent long enough!’

‘O Alabanda! Alabanda!’ I cried.

‘Be still, he replied, ‘and don’t use my name against me like a
dagger!’

Now my own resentment exploded in its turn. We didn’t let it rest till
there was hardly any going back. We violently destroyed the garden of
our love. We often stopped and stood there saying nothing, and would
so gladly have fallen on each other’s necks with thousand joys, but
wretched pride stifled every sound of love that rose up from the heart.

‘Farewell!’ I cried at last and rushed away. Despite myself I had to
look back, despite himself Alabanda had come after me.

‘That’s a strange beggar, isn’t it, Alabanda?’ I called out to him, ‘his
last farthing and he flings it in the mire!’

‘And if that’s the case may starve for all I care,’ he cried and went his
way.

Stunned Istaggered on and presently was standing by the sea, gazing
onto the waves — oh! down strove my heart, down into the deep, and
my arms flew out towards the free flowing surge; but soon, as if from
heaven, a gentler spirit came over me and withits peaceful wand brought
order to the turmoil of my sorrowing soul; more tranquilly Ipondered
my fate, my faith in the world, my dismal experiences, I reflected on my
fellow men, as from early youth I’d come to know and apprehend them,
brought up in their multifarious ways, and everywhere found dull or
strident discord; only in simple childlike limitation did I still find pure
melodies — ‘it’s better,’ I told myself, ‘to become a bee and build one’s
house in innocence than to rule with the rulers of the world and howl

with them as with wolves, than to lord it over whole peoples and sully
one’s hands on such polluted material.’ I wanted to return to Tinos and
live for my gardens and fields.

Smile all you like! I was very much in earnest. For the life of the
world consists in alternate unfolding and closing, issuing forth and
returning to self, why not too the heart of man?

It’s true this new lesson was hard for me to accept, it’s true I was
loath to leave behind the proud errancy of my youth — for who gladly
tears off his wings? — but it had to be!

I went through with it. I was now really embarked. A fresh mountain
breeze carried me out of Smyrna’s harbour. In wonderful tranquillity,
just like a child knowing nothing of the next moment, I lay there on my
ship and gazed on the trees and mosques of the city, my green walks
along the shore, my footpath up to the acropolis, all this I gazed upon,
and let it draw away, further and further away; but now, as I came out
onto the high sea and everything was slowly sinking lower, like a coffin
into the grave, suddenly then it was as if my heart were broken — ‘O
heaven!’ I cried, and all the life in me awoke and struggled to hold back
the fleeing present, but it was gone, gone!

Like a mist it lay before me, that heavenly land where, like a hind let
loose on open pasture, far and wide I’d roamed over vales and heights
and brought the echo of my heart to springs and streams, to breadths
and depths of the earth.

Yonder onto Tmolus I’d walked in lonely innocence; down there to
where Ephesus once stood in happy youth and Teos and Miletus, up
there into the holy grieving Troad I’d wandered with Alabanda — with
Alabanda — and like a god I’d ruled over him, and like a child, tender
and trusting, I’d done his eye’s bidding with joy in my soul, full of
jubilant delight in his being, always happy, whether holding his horse’s
bridle for him, or when, exalted above myself, in glorious resolve, in
daring thoughts, in fiery eloquence, I matched his soul!

And now it had come to this, now I was nothing, I’d been so
hopelessly despoiled of everything, become the poorest among men
and didn’t even know how.

‘O endless erring!’ I thought to myself, ‘when will man tear himself
free from your chains?

‘We speak of our hearts, our plans, as if they were ours, and yet it’s
a power outside ourselves that tosses us about and lays us in the grave
just as it pleases, and we know neither whence it comes nor whither it
goes.

‘We'd like to grow high up here and spread our boughs and branches
out there, and yet it’s soil and weather that decide the way it goes with
us, and if the lightning falls upon your crown and splits you down to
the roots, poor tree! what has it to do with you?’

That’s what I thought. Does it anger you, my Bellarmin? Just wait to
hear what’s still to come.

You see, the sad thing, my dear friend! is that the mind so readily
takes on the errant heart’s complexion, so readily holds fast to fleeting
sorrow, that thought, which ought to heal the pains, becomes itself
sick, that the gardener whose task it is to plant the rosebushes so often
lacerates his hand on them, oh! it’s this that’s made many a man a fool
before those whom, like another Orpheus, he’d otherwise have ruled,
it’s this that’s so often made the noblest nature an object of derision
before such men as can be found in any street, this is the rock on which
heaven's favourites founder, that their love is powerful and tender
as their mind, that often their heart’s waves move more strongly and
more swiftly than the trident with which the sea-god rules them, and
therefore, my dear friend, let no man get above himself!

Hyperion to Bellarmin [VIII]

Can you bear to hear it, will you be able to grasp it when I tell you of
my long sick sorrow?

Take me as I give myself and consider that it’s better to die because
one lived than to live because one never lived! Don’t envy the griefless,
the idols of wood who lack nothing because they’re so poor in soul,
who care nothing whether it’s rain or shine because they’ve nothing that
needs nurturing.

Yes! yes! it’s oh so easy to be happy and at peace when you've a
shallow heart and a narrow spirit. You’re welcome to it; for who is
bothered that the wooden target doesn’t moan when the arrow strikes
it, and that the empty pot makes so hollow a sound when flung against
the wall?

Only you ought to learn your limits, dear people, ought to wonder
in all silence if you cannot grasp that others aren’t so happy, so self-
contented, ought to be wary of making your wisdom law, for if you
were obeyed that would be the end of the world.

I was living now a very still and simple life on Tinos. And I really
did let the world’s appearances pass by like autumn mists, sometimes
laughing moist-eyed at my heart when it flew out for a morsel, like a
bird to painted grapes, and I stayed still and friendly all the while.

I now happily left every man his opinions, his foibles. I was
converted, Ino longer wanted to convert others, only it saddened me to
see that people thought I left their farce unchallenged because I set such
great store by it as they. It’s not so much that I wished to submit to their
silliness, but I tried to spare their feelings where I could. ‘It gives them
joy after all,’ I’d think, ‘it’s what keeps them going!’

Often I even suffered myself to join in, and no matter how spiritless
and impassive my presence, nobody noticed, nothing whatever was
found wanting, and had I begged forgiveness for my demeanour, they’d
have stood there in wonder and asked: ‘What have you done to offend
us then?’ How very tolerant!

Often when I stood by my window of a morning and the bustling day
approached me, I too could forget myself a moment, could look about
me as if eager to engage in some activity in which my being still found
its pleasure as before, but then I would chide myself, then I’d bethink
myself, like a man who lets slip sounds from his mother tongue in a
land where no one understands it — ‘whither, my heart?’ I’d sensibly
tell myself and obey.

‘What does it mean that man desires so much?’ I often asked, ‘why
this infinity in his breast? infinity? where is it then? who has perceived
it then? He wants more than he can have! that’s surely true! Oh! that’s
something you’ ve experienced often enough. And that’s the way it must
be too. That’s what imparts the sweet intoxicating sense of energy that
it doesn’t flow forth as it will, that’s what makes the beautiful dreams
of immortality and all the lovely and colossal phantoms that enrapture
man a thousandfold, that’s what creates for man his Elysium and his
gods that his life’s line doesn’t run straight, that his path isn’t true as an
arrow’s and an alien force impedes him in his flight.

‘The heart’s wave wouldn’t foam up so beautifully, becoming spirit,
if fate, that ancient silent rock, didn’t stand in its way.

‘But yet the impulse dies within our breast, and with it our gods and
their heaven.

‘The fire leaps up in joyous shapes from out of the dark cradle where
it slept, and its flame rises and falls and breaks apart and wraps around
itself again in joy, until its fuel is spent, then it smokes and writhes and
expires; what’s left behind is ash.

‘So it is with us. That’s the essence of everything the sages tell us in
mysteries both awful and alluring.

‘And you? why ask yourself? That there are times when something
rears up within you, and your heart, like the mouth of the dying man, in
a single moment opens and closes so violently, that’s the truly fatal sign.

‘Just be still and let things take their course! no more futile industry!
don’t childishly try to add a cubit to your stature! — It’s like wanting to
create another sun, and spawn for it new satellites, an earth and a moon.’

So I dreamed on. Patiently, little by little I took my leave of
everything. — O you who share with me this age! don’t turn to your
doctors, don’t turn to the priests, when you find yourselves inwardly
dwindling!

You've lost faith in all that is great; so you’re bound, you’re bound
to waste away, unless this faith return like a comet from alien heavens.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [IX]

There’s a forgetting of all existence, a silencing of our being, when
we feel we’ve found everything.

There’s a silencing, a forgetting of all existence, when we feel we’ve
lost everything, a night of the soul, when no shimmer of a star, when not
even a rotting log can give us light.

Id now become calm. Now nothing roused me any more at midnight.
Now I no longer singed myself in my own flame.

Lone and still I now looked straight before me, no roving with my
eye in past and future. Now things far and near no longer jostled in my
mind; unless men forced me to, I didn’t see them.

Once this age would often lie before my mind like the eternally
empty vessel of the Danaids, and with prodigal love my soul poured
itself out to fill up the holes; now Isaw no more holes, now life’s tedium
bore down on me no more.

Now never more did I say to the flower, ‘you’re my sister!’ nor to the
springs, ‘we're of a kind!’ Now, like an echo, I faithfully gave to every
thing its name.

Like a stream past arid banks, where no willow-leaf mirrors in the
water, the world untouched by beauty passed me by.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [X]

Nothing can flourish and nothing so deeply dwindle as man. To the
night of the abyss he often likens his suffering and to the aether his bliss,
and how little does that tell us?

Yet there is nothing lovelier than when it begins to dawn in him
once more, after a long death, and pain goes forth like a brother to meet
distantly dawning joy.

Oh, it was with heavenly anticipation I now greeted the coming
spring! As from afar on a silent breeze the sounds of the loved one’s lyre
when all are sleeping, so spring’s soft melodies wafted round my breast,
as if from Elysium I sensed its coming when the dead branches stirred
and a gentle breath caressed my cheek.

Lovely heaven of Ionia! never had I so cleaved to you, but then never
in its blithe and tender play had my heart been so akin to you as now. —

Who doesn’t yearn for the joys of love and great deeds when in the
eye of heaven and the bosom of the earth the spring returns?

I rose as from my sickbed, softly and slowly, but my breast trembled
so blissfully with secret hopes that I forgot to ask myself what this might
signify.

Now in sleep more beautiful dreams enfolded me, and when I woke
they were in my heart like the trace of a kiss on the cheek of the beloved.
Oh, the morning light and I, we now approached each other like friends
freshly reconciled, when they still affect aloofness and yet already hold
within their soul the nearing endless moment of embrace.

And indeed my eye opened once again, though no longer as before,
steeled and full of its own power; it had become more beseeching, it
begged for life, but deep within I still felt things could again be with me
as before, and better.

I beheld again my fellow men, as if I too looked to play my part and
find my joy amongst them. I truly joined in everywhere with a whole
heart.

Heavens! what gloating glee there was that the proud maverick had
ended up as one of them! what a joke: the stag of the forest driven by
hunger to come running into their barnyard! —

Oh! it’s my Adamas I was searching for, my Alabanda, but there
appeared to me none.

Finally I wrote to Smyrna, and as I wrote, it was as if all the tenderness
and might of man were compressed into a single moment; three times
so I wrote, but no reply, I begged, threatened, minded him of all the
hours of love and boldness, but no reply from him, the unforgettable,
loved unto death — ‘Alabanda!’ I cried, ‘O my Alabanda! you’ve broken
the staff over me. You kept me upright, you were the last hope of my
youth! There’s now nothing left for me! that’s now holy and certain!’

We pity the dead as if they felt death, and yet the dead have peace.
But this, this is the pain beyond all pain, this is relentless feeling of
total annihilation when our life so loses all meaning, when the heart
says to itself, ‘down you must go and nothing will remain of you; no
flower have you planted, no hut have you built, only to be able to say: I
leave behind a trace on earth.’ Oh! and yet the soul can still be so full of
yearning, for all its despondency!

I was always searching for something, but I didn’t dare look up in
human company. I had hours I could be frightened by the laughter of
a child.

Yet mostly I was very still and patient, and often had a wondrous
foolish faith in the healing powers of certain things; from a dove that
I bought, from a trip in a boat, from a valley the mountains concealed
from me, I could promise myself solace.

Enough! enough! had I grown up with Themistocles, had I lived
amongst the Scipios, believe me, never would my soul have come to
know itself from this side.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XI]

Still there were times when mind and spirit stirred in me. But all to
only ravaging effect!

‘What is man?’ I could begin; ‘how can it be that such a thing is in
the world that ferments like a chaos or moulders like a rotting tree, and
never grows to ripeness. How can nature suffer this sour grape amid
her sweet clusters?

‘To the plants he says, “I too was once like you!” and to the pure
stars, “I will become like you, in another world!” Meanwhile he breaks
asunder and keeps practising his arts upon himself, as if he could, once
it’s come apart, put a living thing together again like a wall of bricks; but
it doesn’t even trouble him when nothing is improved by all his efforts;
what he works will always stay mere artifice.

‘Oh, you poor wights who feel this, you who too are loath to talk
of man’s vocation, who too are gripped so through and through by
the Nothing that sways over us, so clearly see that we are born for
Nothing, what we love is Nothing, what we believe in is Nothing, that
we grind ourselves down for Nothing, only to slowly pass over into
Nothing — can I help it that your knees give way when you take it all
in? For more than once I too have been brought low in such thoughts
and have cried out, “why do you lay the axe to my root, cruel spirit?”,
and still I’m here.

‘Oh once, you dismal brethren! it was different. Then everything
above us was so beautiful, so beautiful and blithe was all before us;
these hearts too welled over before the distant blissful phantoms, and
in bold exuberance our spirits too forged upwards and broke through
the bounds, and when they looked around, oh woe, all was endless
void.

‘Oh! I can fling myself on my knees and wring my hands and beseech
I don’t know whom? for other thoughts. But I can’t overcome it, the
screaming truth. Have I not convinced myself twice over? When I look
into life, what’s at the end of it all? Nothing. When I soar in the spirit,
what’s at the summit of all? Nothing.

‘But be still, my heart! It’s your last strength you're wasting! your
last strength? and you, you would storm heaven? where then are your
hundred arms, Titan, where your Pelion and Ossa, your stairway to the
fortress of the father of the gods, so that you may climb up and cast
down the god and his table and all the immortal peaks of Olympus, and
preach to mortal men: “Stay below, children of the moment! don’t strive
to scale these heights, for there’s nothing up here.”

‘And you yourself can leave off trying to see what sways the lives of
others. For you your new lesson applies. Above you and before you all
is waste and void, and that’s because within you all is waste and void.

‘And indeed if you others are richer than I, you could at least help
just a little.

‘If your garden’s so full of flowers, why does their breath not rejoice
me too? — If you're so full of divinity, give me to drink of it. For no one
starves at a feast, not even the poorest of men. But there’s only one who
holds his feasts amongst you; and that is death.

‘Need and fear and night are your masters. They sunder you, they
drive you together with blows. Hunger you call love, and where you
can see nothing more, there dwell your gods. Gods and love?

‘Oh, the poets are right, there’s nought so small and trifling that it
can’t be made the stuff of inspiration.’

That’s what I thought. How it came to be in me I still can’t
comprehend.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XII]

I’m living now on the island of Ajax, beloved Salamis.

I love this Greece all over. It bears the colour of my heart. Wherever
you look a joy lies buried.

And yet around you is so much loveliness and grandeur too.

On the headland I’ve built me a hut of mastic twigs, and round about
it planted moss and trees and thyme and all manner of shrubs.

There I spend my sweetest hours, there I sit whole evenings and gaze
across to Attica, until at last my heart begins to race; then I take my
tackle, go down to the bay and catch some fish.

Or up there on my promontory I read about the glorious ancient sea
battle that once in wild and wisely managed turmoil spent its rage at
Salamis, and take my pleasure in the spirit that could steer and tame
the furious chaos of friend and foe, like a rider his steed, and feel deep
shame at my own career as warrior.

Or I look out upon the sea and ponder my life, its rising and sinking,
its bliss and its grief, and my past often sounds to me like a lyre when
the master runs through all the tones, throwing together discord and
harmony in hidden order.

It’s thrice beautiful up here today. Two gentle days of rain have
cooled the air and the life-weary earth.

The ground has grown greener, the field has unfolded. Endless stands
the golden wheat, mingled with joyful cornflowers, and light and bright
a thousand hopeful crowns rise from the depths of the grove. Gently
and grandly each line in the distance weaves through the space; like

steps the mountains climb up to the sun, one after another in ceaseless
procession. All heaven is limpid. The white light only softly suffuses the
aether, and like a silver cloudlet the bashful moon goes floating by in
the brightness of day.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XIII]

It’s been a long time since I felt as Ido now.

Like Jupiter’s eagle to the song of the muses I hark to the wonderful
endless harmony in me. Untroubled in mind and soul, strong and blithe,
in smiling earnest I sport in spirit with fate and the three sisters, the holy
Parcae. Full of godly youth my whole being exults in itself, in all things.
Like the starry heavens I’m both still and moved.

I’ve waited long for such a festal spell as this to write to you once
more. Now I’m strong enough; now let me tell you.

In the midst of my dark days an acquaintance from Calauria invited
me across. I should come into his mountains, he wrote: life there was
lived more freely than elsewhere, and besides, amongst the pinewoods
and rushing waters, there bloomed lemon groves and palms and sweet
herbs and myrtles and the holy vine. High in the mountains he’d built a
garden and a house, shaded by lush trees at the rear, and in the searing
summer days cooling breezes softly played about it; like a bird from the
top of the cedar you could look down into the depths, to the villages
and green hills and contented flocks of the island that lay all around the
magnificent mountain like children and nourished themselves from its
foaming streams.

This at least roused me a little. It was a bright blue April day when
I sailed across. The sea was unusually beautiful and limpid, and light
the air as in higher regions. In the gliding craft you left the earth behind
you, like a luscious dish when holy wine is offered.

A gloomy mood is no match for the influence of sea and air. I gave
myself up, fretted no more about myself and others, sought for nothing,
pondered nothing, let myself be rocked into half-slumber by the boat,
imagining I lay in Charon’s bark. Oh, it’s sweet to drink like this from
the chalice of oblivion.

My cheerful boatman would have liked to chat with me, but I kept
very taciturn.

He pointed with his finger to show me right and left this or that blue
island, but I didn’t look for long and next moment was back in my own
dear dreams.

But when he pointed out to me the tranquil peaks in the distance
and said that we should soon be in Calauria, I paid at last more heed,
and my whole being opened itself to the wonderful power that all of a
sudden sweetly and peacefully and inexplicably played with me. Wide-
eyed, marvelling and full of joy I gazed out into the mysteries of the
distance, my heart trembled lightly and a hand escaped and clutched
my boatman in friendly haste — ‘Really?’ I cried, ‘that’s Calauria?’ And
when he gave me an odd look, I didn’t know what to make of myself
either. I greeted my friend with wonderful tenderness. My whole being
was full of sweet unrest.

That very same afternoon I wanted to roam through part of the
island. The woods and secret valleys attracted me ineffably, and the
clement day lured all out into the open.

It was so plain to see how everything that lives craves more than its
daily bread, how even the birds and the beasts have their feast days.

It was a rapturous sight! As when the mother teasingly asks wherever
her dearest might be, and all of the children rush into her lap, and even
the smallest stretches its arms from the cradle, so flew and leapt and
strove all life into the heavenly air, and beetles and swallows and doves
and storks cavorted together in the heights and the depths in joyous
confusion, and what the earth held fast found its steps turning to flight,
the horse went hurtling over the ditches and over the hedges the deer,
and from the ground of the sea the fishes rose up and hopped above the
surface. The motherly air infused the hearts of all, uplifted them and
drew them to itself.

And the people came out of their doors and felt wonderfully the
spiritual breath as gently it stirred the wisps of hair on their brows,
as it cooled the streaming sunlight, and benignly they loosened their
clothing to take it to their bosom, breathed more sweetly, touched
more tenderly the light and lucent soothing sea in which they lived
and moved.

O sister of the spirit which lives and sways in us with fiery power,
O holy air! how beautiful it is that, all-pervasive and immortal, you’re
there with me wherever I may wander!

It’s with the children that the sublime element played most
beautifully.

This one hummed happily to himself, a tuneless ditty slipped from
the lips of that one, and from another came full-throated cries of joy;
this one stretched, that one leapt high; another strolled round, lost in
thought.

And all this was the language of one single sense of well-being, all
one single response to the caresses of the rapturous breezes.

I was filled with ineffable longing and peace. A strange power
swayed me. ‘Friendly spirit,’ I said to myself, ‘whither do you call me?
to Elysium or where?’

I went walking in a wood, up by rippling water where it trickled
over rocks, where it glided harmless over pebbles, and step by step the
valley narrowed, becoming an archway, and lonely the noonday light
played in the silent gloom —

Here — would that I could speak, my Bellarmin! that I could write
to you calmly!

Speak? oh, I’m a layman in joy, I will speak!

For stillness dwells in the land of the blissful, and above the stars the
heart forgets its anguish and its language.

I’ve kept it sacred! like a palladium I’ve carried it within me, the
divine that was revealed to me! and if fate henceforth should seize and
plunge me down from abyss to abyss and drown in me all energy and
all reason, yet shall this one and only outlive myself in me and shine in
me and reign in eternal, indestructible glory! —

So you lay there lissomely, sweet life, so you looked up, rose and
stood in slender fullness, divinely calm, your heavenly face still filled
with the serene rapture I’d disturbed!

Oh, he who’s gazed into the stillness of these eyes, he for whom these
sweet lips have opened, of what more shall he speak?

Peace of beauty! divine peace! he who’s once soothed in you his
seething life and doubting spirit, how can ought else help him?

I cannot speak of her, but there are hours when the best and the
most beautiful appears as in clouds, and the heaven of perfection opens
before the intuition of love, then, Bellarmin! then think of her being,
then go down on your knees with me, and think of my bliss! but don’t
forget that I possessed what you can only sense, that with these eyes I
saw what only as in clouds appears to you.

That men will sometimes say that they feel joyful! Oh, believe you
me, you've never had even an inkling of joy! Not the shadow of its
shadow has appeared to you! Oh, go, you blindlings, and speak no
more of the blue aether!

That we can become as children, that still the golden time of
innocence returns, the time of peace and freedom, that there’s yet one
joy, one resting place on earth!

Is man not grown old and withered, is he not like a fallen leaf that
can’t find back to its stem and is whirled around with the winds until
it’s buried by the sand?

And yet his spring will come again!

Do not weep when the best decays! soon it will renew itself! Do not
grieve when your heart’s melody falls silent! soon there’ll come a hand
to make it sound again!

How then was it with me? was I not like a shattered lyre? I sounded
still a little, but they were death tones. I’d sung myself a sombre
swansong! Id gladly have woven myself a funeral wreath, but I had
only winter flowers.

And where then was it now, the deathly silence, the night and
desolation of my life? all the beggarly mortality?

It’s true that life’s a poor and lonely thing. We dwell here in the deep
like the diamond in the mine. We ask in vain how we came down so that
we may find the way back up again.

We're like fire that slumbers in the tinder-dry branch or the flint; and
all the while we writhe and seek the end of close confinement. But they
come, they make up for eons of struggle, those moments of liberation,
when the divine bursts open the dungeon, when the flame frees itself
from the wood and surges victorious over the ash, ha! when we feel
as if the unbound spirit, forgotten its suffering, its servile form, were
returning in triumph to the halls of the sun.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XIV]

Once I was happy, Bellarmin! Am I not still? Would I not be even if
that hallowed moment when I first saw her had been the last?

I have seen it once, the one and only that my soul was seeking, and
the consummation we project beyond the stars, that we defer until the

end of time, I’ve felt it in the here and now. It was here, the most high,
in this cycle of human nature and of things, it was here!

I no longer ask where it is; it was in the world, it can return in the
world, it’s in the world now, only more hidden. I no longer ask what it
is; I’ve seen it, I’ve known it.

O you who seek the highest and the best, be it in the depths of
knowledge, in the turmoil of action, in the darkness of the past, in the
labyrinth of the future, in the graves or above the stars! do you know its
name? the name of what is one and all?

Its name is beauty.

Did you know what you were seeking? I don’t yet know it, but I can
sense it, the new kingdom of the new godhead, and rushing towards it
lay hold of the others and carry them with me, like the river the rivers
into the ocean.

And it was you, my love, who showed me the way! With you I began.
They’re not worthy of words, the days when I didn’t yet know you —

O Diotima, Diotima, heavenly being!

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XV]

Let’s forget that time exists and not count life’s days!

What are centuries to the moment when two beings so sense and
near one another?

I still see the evening when Notara took me for the first time to her
house.

She lived only a few hundred steps from us at the foot of the
mountain.

Her mother was a thoughtful tender being, a simple cheerful lad the
brother, and both conceded happily in all their doings that Diotima was
the household’s queen.

Oh! everything was hallowed, made beautiful by her presence.
Wherever I looked, whatever I touched, her carpet, her cushion, her
little table, everything was in secret unison with her. And when she
called me by name for the first time, when she even came so close to me
that her innocent breath touched my listening being! —

We spoke very little together. You’re ashamed of your language. You’d
like to become pure tone and blend with the other in one celestial song.

And what was there to speak of? It’s only each other we saw. To
speak of ourselves we were shy.

We spoke at last of the life of the earth.

So fiery and childlike a hymn has never been sung to her.

It did us good to strew our hearts’ abundance in the good mother’s
lap. We felt ourselves lightened like the trees when the summer wind
shakes their fruitful branches and pours their sweet apples into the
grass.

We called the earth one of the flowers of heaven, and heaven we called
the infinite garden of life. As the roses gladden each other with golden
dust, we said, so the heroic sunlight gladdens the earth with its rays; she
is a glorious living being, we said, equally divine whether raging fire or
mild clear water spring from her heart, ever happy whether she nourish
herself on dew drops or storm clouds, prepared for her pleasure with
heaven’s help, she, the ever more truly loving half of the sun-god, in
the beginning more inly one with him perhaps, but then sundered from
him by an almighty fate, so that she might seek him, come close, draw
away, and in joy and grief ripen to supreme beauty.

So we spoke. I give you the substance, the spirit of it. But what’s that
without the life?

It was growing dark and we had to leave. ‘Good night, you angel
eyes!’ I thought in my heart, ‘and do soon appear to me again, lovely
divine spirit, with your peace and fullness!’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XVI]

Some days later they came up to visit us. We walked around together
in the garden. Diotima and I strayed ahead, immersed, and tears of
joy would come to my eyes over the hallowed being who walked so
unassumingly beside me.

Now we stood close by the edge of the mountain’s summit and
gazed out into the endless east.

Diotima’s eye opened wide and softly as a bud unfolds, her lovely
little face unfolded before the breezes of heaven, became pure speech
and soul, and as if about to fly into the clouds, her whole figure stood
there stretching lightly up in airy majesty and her feet barely touched
the earth.

Oh, I could have clasped her under the arms, like the eagle his
Ganymede, and with her flown away above the sea and its islands.

Now she stepped further forward and gazed down the sheer cliff
face. She took her delight in plumbing the awesome depth and losing
herself in the night of the forests that stretched up their bright crowns
from broken rocks and foaming rain-swollen streams below.

The rail on which she leaned was rather low. And so she let me
hold her a little, the delightful creature, as she bent forward. Oh! hot
trembling bliss swept through my being and sent all my senses reeling
and raging, and my hands burned like coals when I touched her.

And then my heart’s joy at standing beside her in such closeness,
and my gentle childish fear that she might fall, and my delight in the
inspiration of the glorious maiden!

What is all that men have done and thought in whole millennia
compared to a single moment of love? For is it not of all the things in
nature the most consummate, the most divinely beautiful! it’s thither all
steps lead on the threshold of life. Thence we come and thither we go.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XVII]

Only her song should I forget, only these sounds from the soul
should never more return in my ceaseless dreams.

One doesn’t know the proudly-sailing swan when it sits slumbering
on the bank.

Only when she sang did one truly know this loving silent being who
was So loath to speak.

Then, only then, did she, heavenly reticent, come forth in all her
majesty and loveliness; then it breathed out from her tender blossoming
lips, often so coaxingly and so caressingly, often like the commandment
of a god. And how the heart stirred in that divine voice, how all greatness
and humility, all the joy and all the grief of life seemed graced in the
nobility of those tones!

As the swallow snatches bees in flight, so she always seized us all.

It wasn’t pleasure, it wasn’t admiration, it was the peace of heaven
that came among us.

A thousand times I’ve told her and myself: the most beautiful is also
the most hallowed. And so was everything about her. As her song, so
too her life.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XVIII]

Amongst the flowers her heart was at home, as if it were one of them.

She called them all by name, made them new and more beautiful
names out of love and unerringly knew the happiest season of each.

Like a sister when from every nook a loved one comes clamouring,
each wanting to be greeted first, so this still being was busy with hand
and eye, blissfully distracted, whenever we walked through wood or
meadow.

And this wasn’t at all learned or assumed, in her it had naturally
grown.

For it’s a truth eternally valid and everywhere manifest: the more
innocent and beautiful a soul, the closer the bond with those other
happy lives that we call soulless.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XIX]

A thousand times I’ve laughed in the joy of my heart at those
who imagine a sublime spirit cannot possibly know how to prepare a
vegetable. If the occasion arose Diotima was quite capable of speaking
with real passion of the hearth, and there’s surely nothing nobler than
a noble maiden who tends the wholesome flame and, akin to nature
herself, prepares the food that gladdens the heart.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XX]

What's all the artful knowledge in the world, what’s the whole proud
perfection of human thought, compared to the unstudied tones of this
spirit that knew neither what it knew nor what it was?

Who wouldn’t rather have their grape in a cluster, full and fresh,
just as it sprang from the root, than the dried plucked berries that the
merchant crams into the crate and sends out into the world? What’s the
wisdom of a book compared to the wisdom of an angel?

She seemed always to say so little, and said so much.

Once I walked her home in the gloaming; like dreams wisps of dewy
mist came stealing over the meadow, like eavesdropping genii the
blissful stars peeped through the boughs.

You seldom heard a ‘how beautiful!’ from her lips, even though this
pious heart left no lisping leaf, no murmur of a burn unheeded.

But this time she did indeed speak it out to me — ‘how beautiful!’

‘Well, that will be for our sake!’ I said, rather in the way that children
say things, neither in jest nor in earnest.

‘I can imagine what you mean,’ she responded, ‘I best like to picture
the world to myself as the life of a couthie household where everyone
fits in with the others without even having to think about it, and we live
for the pleasure and joy of each other because that’s how it comes from
the heart.’

‘Happy, sublime faith!’ I cried.

She was silent a while.

‘So we too are children of the house,’ I finally resumed, ‘we are and
we shall be.’

‘Shall for ever be,’ she responded.

‘Shall we?’ I asked.

‘In this I put my trust in nature,’ she continued, ‘as I do every day.’

Oh, to have been Diotima when she said this! But you don’t know
what she said, my Bellarmin! You didn’t see it and didn’t hear it.

‘Youre right,’ I cried to her; ‘eternal beauty, nature suffers no loss in
herself, just as she suffers no addition. Her costume will be tomorrow
different from today; but our best, us, us she cannot do without and
you least of all. We believe we’re eternal, for our soul feels the beauty of
nature. She'll be mere patchwork, no longer divine, no longer complete,
if ever you’re missing in her. She doesn’t deserve your heart if she has to
blush before your hopes.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXI]

I’ve never known anything so free from wants, so divinely
self-sufficient.

As the wave of the ocean round the shores of blissful islands, so my
restless heart swirled round the peace of the heavenly maiden.

I had nothing to give her but a spirit full of wild contradictions, full
of bleeding memories, nothing to give but my unbounded love with
its thousand cares, its thousand tumultuous hopes; but there she stood
before me in changeless beauty, effortlessly, in smiling perfection, and

all the yearning, all the dreaming of mortality, oh! everything that in
golden hours of morning the genius foretells of higher spheres, was all
fulfilled in this single tranquil soul.

They say the struggle abates above the stars, and it’s only in the
future, so they promise us, once our yeast has sunk, that fermenting
life will turn into the noble wine of joy; otherwise the blessed’s peace of
heart is now nowhere to be sought upon this earth. I know different. I’ve
come the shorter way. I stood before her and heard and saw the peace of
heaven, and in the midst of groaning chaos there appeared to me Urania.

How often have I stilled my sorrowing before this image! how often
have overweening life and striving spirit been assuaged when, sunk
in blissful contemplation, I looked into her heart, as one looks into the
source when it softly trembles from the touches of heaven, trickling
down on it in silver droplets!

She was my Lethe, this soul, my holy Lethe, from which I drank
oblivion of existence, so that I stood before her like an immortal, and
joyfully scolded myself, and as after heavy dreams could not but smile
at all the chains that had borne me down.

Oh, with her I should have become a happy man, a great man!

With her! but that has gone awry, and now I err around in what’s
before and in me and beyond, and don’t know what to make of myself
and other things.

My soul is like a fish cast out of its element upon the sand of the shore,
and writhing and thrashing about till it shrivels up in the heat of the day.

Oh! if only there were still something in the world for me to do! if
there were some work, a war for me, that should quicken me!

Babes torn from their mother’s breasts and cast into the desert were
once, so they say, suckled by a wolf.

My heart is not so lucky.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXII]

All that I can speak of her is scattered words. I must forget what she
is whole if I’m to speak of her. I must make believe she lived in times of
old, that I knew of her through tales, if her living image isn’t so to seize
me that I perish in rapture and pain, if I’m not to die of my joy in her
and my grief for her.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXIII]

It’s no use; I can’t conceal it from myself. Whither I flee with my
thoughts, up to the heavens and into the abyss, to the beginning and
end of time, even to him who was my last refuge, who’d once consume
every last care in me, who'd once sear all life’s pleasure and all its pain
in me with the flame of fire in which he revealed himself, even if I throw
myself into his arms, the glorious secret spirit of the world, dive down
into his depths as into the bottomless ocean, even there, even there shall
the sweet dread find me out, the sweet bewildering lethal dread, that
Diotima’s grave is near.

Do you hear? do you hear? Diotima’s grave!

Yet my heart had grown so still, and my love lay buried with the
dead one I loved.

You know, my Bellarmin! for long I didn’t write to you of her, and
when I wrote, I wrote to you calmly, I think.

And now what?

I go down to the shore and gaze out towards Calauria where she
rests, that’s what.

Oh, let no one lend his boat to me, let no one take pity and offer me
his oar and help me across to her!

Let the goodly waters not stay calm, lest I hew myself a piece of
timber and swim across to her!

But I will fling myself into the raging sea and beg its wave to cast me
up on Diotima’s shore! —

Dear brother! I comfort my heart with all kinds of fancies, I grant
myself many a sleeping draught; and it would no doubt be nobler to
free oneself forever than to make do with palliatives; but isn’t that the
way it is with all of us? So I’m content it should be so.

Content? oh, that would be a fine thing! that would be help indeed
where never a god can help.

Now! now! I’ve done what I could! I demand from fate my soul.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXIV]

Was she not mine, you sisters of fate, was she not mine? The pure
springs I call to witness and the innocent trees that overheard us, and

the daylight and the aether! was she not mine? not one with me in all
the chords of life?

Where is the being that knew her like mine? in what mirror were
gathered the rays of that light as in me? was she not joyfully startled at
her own glory when first she became aware of herself in my joy? Oh!
where is the heart that, like mine, was everywhere close to her, that, like
mine, filled her and was filled by her, that was there solely to embrace
hers, as the eyelid is there for the eye.

We were but a single flower, and our souls lived in one another like
the flower when it loves and conceals its tender joys in its closed chalice.

And yet, and yet was she not torn from me like a crown usurped, and
laid into the dust?

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXV]

Before either of us knew it we belonged to one another.

When, with all the homage of my heart, blissfully overcome, I stood
before her saying nothing, and my whole life gave itself up in the beams
of the eye that saw only her, embraced only her, and she gazed at me in
turn, tenderly doubting, not knowing where my thoughts were taking
me, and when, buried in beauty and delight, I often discreetly watched
her at some charming occupation, and my soul flitted and flew about
her slightest movement as the bee about the swaying twigs, and when
then in peaceful thought she turned towards me and, startled by my joy,
had to conceal my joy from herself, and sought and found tranquillity
again in her beloved task —

When, wondrously all-knowing, she revealed to me every harmony,
every discord in the depths of my being at the moment it began, before
I even noticed it myself, when she saw every shadow of a cloudlet on
my brow, every shadow of sadness, of pride on my lips, every spark in
my eye, when she caught the ebb and flow of my heart, and caringly
sensed gloomy hours approaching as my spirit too intemperately and
prodigally consumed itself in tumid talk, when the dear being, more
faithfully than a mirror, betrayed to me every change in my cheek, and
often reproved me in loving concern at my unstable being, and chided
me like a cherished child —

Oh! when once, you innocent, you counted on your fingers the steps
from our mountain down to your house, when you showed me your
walks, the places where you used to sit and told me how the time had
passed for you there, and finally said that now you felt as if I’d always
been there too —

Had we not then long since belonged to one another?

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXVI]

I’m building a grave for my heart, that it may rest; I spin a cocoon
around myself, because everywhere it’s winter, in blissful memories I
wrap myself against the storm.

Once we sat in Diotima’s garden under blossoming almond trees,
together with Notara — that’s the friend with whom I was staying — and
some others who also, like us, belonged to the mavericks in Calauria,
and we spoke amongst other things of friendship.

I'd contributed little; for some time now I’d grown chary of making
many words about things that first concern the heart, my Diotima had
made me so taciturn —

‘When Harmodius and Aristogeiton lived,’ someone cried at last,
‘there was still friendship in the world.’ That delighted me too much for
me to keep my peace.

‘They should weave you a crown for those words!’ I cried to him;
‘do you really have an inkling, do you have a likeness for the friendship
of Aristogeiton and Harmodius? Forgive me! But by the Aether! you’d
have to be Aristogeiton to feel how Aristogeiton loved, and it didn’t
do to be afraid of lightning if a man would be loved with the love of
Harmodius, for unless I’m much mistaken the terrible youth loved with
the rigour of Minos. Few could withstand such a test, and it’s no easier
to be the friend of a demi-god than, like Tantalus, to sit at the table of
the gods. But there’s also nothing more glorious on earth than when as
proud a pair as these are so in thrall to one another.

‘And this is my hope, my joy in lonely hours, that in the symphony
of the world’s course tones as great and greater still must one day come
again. Love brought forth millennia full of living men; friendship will
bring them forth again. From childhood harmony the peoples once
set out; with the harmony of spirits a new world history will begin.

From the happiness of plants men began and grew up, grew until they
ripened; from then on they fermented forth unceasingly, both inwardly
and outwardly, till now the human race, in infinite dissolution, lies there
like a chaos, and all those who still feel and see are gripped by dizziness;
but beauty takes flight from the life of men, up into the spirit; what
was nature becomes the ideal, and though the tree may be withered
and weathered from below, a fresh crown has still sprung from it and
greens in the sun’s glory, as the stem once did in the days of youth; what
was nature is the ideal. And it’s by this ideal, this rejuvenated godhead,
that the few shall know each other and they are one, for the oneness is
in them, and from them, these few, shall begin the second age of the
world — I’ve said enough to make clear what I think.’

You should have seen Diotima then as she leapt up and held out
both her hands to me and cried: ‘I’ve understood it, dearest, wholly
understood, though it says so much.

‘Love brought forth the world, friendship will bring it forth again.

‘Oh then, you who are to come, you new dioscuri, then linger a little
when you pass the place where Hyperion sleeps, linger mindfully over
the ashes of the forgotten man, and say: “He’d be one of us were he here
now.”

This I have heard, my Bellarmin! this I have known, and won’t go
willingly to my death?

Yes! yes! I’ve had my dues already, I have lived. More joy a god
could bear, but not me.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXVII]

Do you ask how I felt at this time? Like someone who’s lost everything
to gain everything.

It’s true I often came from Diotima’s trees like one drunk with
triumph, often I’d have to rush away from her lest I betray any of my
thoughts; so raged the joy in me, and the pride, the all-inspiring faith of
being loved by Diotima.

Then Id search out the highest mountains and their winds, and
like an eagle whose bleeding wing has healed, my spirit stirred in the
boundless air and spread itself out over the visible world as if this were
its own; oh, wonder! I often felt as if the things of the earth were purified

and fused together in my fire like gold, and a thing divine became of
them and me, so raged in me the joy; and how I lifted up the children
and pressed them to my throbbing heart, how I greeted the plants and
the trees! I could have wished for a magic charm to gather the timid deer
and all the wild birds of the forest like a family of little folk around my
liberal hands, in such blissful folly did I love all things!

But not for long, then that was all extinguished in me like a light, and
I'd sit there mute and mournful as a shade and sought my vanished life.
I had no use for lamentation, nor did I want consolation. Hope I cast
away, like a cripple whose crutch is hateful to him; I was ashamed to
weep; I felt ashamed for existing at all. Yet in the end my pride broke out
in tears, the pain I’d gladly have denied became dear to me, and I laid it
like a child to my breast.

‘No,’ cried my heart, ‘no, my Diotima! it doesn’t hurt. Preserve your
peace for yourself and let me go my way. Don’t let your tranquillity
be disturbed, you lovely star! when below you there’s ferment and
turbidness.

‘Oh, don’t let your rose fade, you blissful youth of the gods! Don’t let
your beauty age in the troubles of the earth. For this is my joy, sweet life!
that you bear within you carefree heaven. You shall not suffer want, no,
no! you shall not see within yourself the penury of love.’

And when I then went down to her again — Id have liked to ask the
breeze and read in the drift of the clouds how it would be with me in an
hour! and how delighted I was when some friendly face met me on the
way and, so long as it wasn’t too dryly, called out to me his ‘Good day!’

When a little girl came out of the woods and held out a bunch of
strawberries for me to buy, with a look as though she’d rather make a
gift of them, or when a peasant, sitting picking cherries in his tree, called
down from the branches as I passed and asked if I’d not care to try a
handful: these were good omens for my superstitious heart!

To top it all, if facing the path down which I came, one of Diotima’s
windows was standing open, how good that could make me feel!

Perhaps she’d looked out not long before.

And now I stood before her, breathless and unsteady, pressing my
crossed arms against my heart so as not to feel its trembling, and like the
swimmer from rushing waters, my spirit struggled and strove not to go
under in endless love.

‘What are we talking about just now?’ I could cry, ‘it’s often so hard,
you can’t find the matter to hold fast your thoughts.’

‘Are they taking off into the air again?’ replied my Diotima. ‘You'll
have to bind lead to their wings, or Ill tie them to a string, like the boy
his flying dragon, so they can’t get away from us.’

The dear girl was trying with a jest to help herself and me, but it was
to little avail.

‘Yes, yes!’ I cried, ‘as you like, as you think best — shall I read to you?
Your lute will still be tuned from yesterday — I don’t have anything to
read to you right now —’

‘You've promised more than once,’ she said, ‘to tell me how you
lived before we met, won’t you tell me now?’

‘That’s true,’ I replied; my heart gladly pounced on this, and so then
I told her, as I’ve told you, of Adamas and my lonely days in Smyrna, of
Alabanda and how I was parted from him, and of the baffling sickness
of my being before I came over to Calauria — ‘now you know it all,’ I
told her calmly when I'd finished, ‘now you will find in me less cause
for offence; now you will say,’ I added with a smile, ‘don’t mock this
Vulcan if he limps, for twice he’s been hurled from heaven to earth by
the gods.’

‘Hush,’ she cried in a choking voice and hid her tears in her
handkerchief, ‘oh hush, and don’t make fun of your fate, of your heart!
for I understand it, and better than you.

‘Dear — dear Hyperion! there’s no helping you, I fear.

‘Do you really know,’ she continued with heightened voice, ‘do you
really know what it is you're starving for, the one thing that you lack,
what you're searching for like Alpheus his Arethusa, what you’ve been
grieving for in all your grief? It didn’t depart just years ago, one can’t
say precisely when it was there, when it went away, but it was, it is, in
you it is! It’s a better age you're seeking, a more beautiful world. It was
only that world you embraced in your friends, with them you were that
world.

‘In Adamas it had dawned for you; it had also departed with him.
In Alabanda its light appeared to you a second time, only more fierce
and fervid, and that’s why it was like midnight for your soul when he
left your life.

‘And do you see now why the smallest doubt about Alabanda was
bound to become despair in you? why you only cast him off because he
wasn’t quite a god?

‘You didn’t want human beings, believe me, you wanted a world.
The loss of all the golden centuries, as you felt them, compressed into
a single happy moment, the spirit of all the spirits of better times, the
energy of all the energies of the heroes, all this was to be made good for
you by a single mere man! — Do you see now how poor, how rich you
are? why you should be so proud and also so cast down? why for you
joy and grief alternate so terribly?

‘It’s because you have everything and nothing, because the phantom
of the golden days which are to come is yours and yet isn’t there, because
you're a citizen in the regions of justice and beauty, a god amongst gods
in the beautiful dreams that steal upon you by day, and awake to find
yourself standing on modern Greek soil.

‘Twice, you said? oh, you're hurled from heaven to earth seventy
times in a single day. Shall I say it? I fear for you, you'll scarce be able
to bear the fate of these times. There are diverse things you'll still try,
you'll —

‘Oh God! and your final refuge will be a grave.’

‘No, Diotima,’ I cried, ‘no, by heaven, no! As long as one melody
still sounds for me, Ill not fear the deathly stillness of the wilderness
beneath the stars; as long as the sun only shines and Diotima, there is
for me no night.

‘Let the death knell toll for all the virtues! it’s you I hear, you, your
heart’s song, my love! and find immortal life while all else burns out
and withers.’

‘O Hyperion,’ she cried, ‘what are you saying?”

‘I speak as I must. I can’t, I can’t any longer hide all the bliss and fear
and care — Diotima! — Yes, you know it, must know it, have long since
seen it, that I shall go under unless you give me your hand.’

She was taken aback, confounded.

‘And to me,’ she cried, ‘to me Hyperion would cling? well then I wish,
for the first time now I wish to be more than a mere mortal maiden. But
I'll be for you what I can.’

‘Oh then you’re everything for me!’ I cried.

‘Everything? you wicked hypocrite! and what of mankind that’s in
the end your only love?’

‘Mankind?’ I said. ‘I would that mankind made its watchword
Diotima and painted your image on its banners, and proclaimed: “Today
the divine shall triumph!” Angel of heaven! what a day that would be!’

‘Go,’ she cried, ‘go and show your glory to heaven! it must not be so
close to me.

‘You will go, won’t you, dear Hyperion?’

I obeyed. Who would not have done? I went. Never had I gone from
her like this before. O Bellarmin! that was joy, stillness of life, peace of
the gods, heavenly, wonderful, unknowable joy.

Words are useless here, and whoever seeks a likeness for it has never
felt it. The only thing that could express such joy was Diotima’s song,
floating in golden mean between high and low.

O you willow banks of Lethe! you sunset paths in forests of Elysium!
you lilies by the valley’s streams! you rose-wreaths of the hill! I believe
in you, in this friendly hour, and speak to my heart: ‘there you shall find
her again, and all the joy you have lost.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXVIII]

I will tell you ever more of my bliss.

I will prove my breast on the joys of the past until it becomes like
steel, I will practise on them until I’m invincible.

Ha! they may often fall like the stroke of a sword on my soul, but Ill
play with the sword until I’m inured to it, [Il hold my hand in the fire
until I can bear it like water.

I will not flinch; yes! I will be strong! I will conceal nothing from
myself, I will conjure the most blissful of all my blisses from the grave.

It’s beyond belief that man should fear what is most beautiful; yet it
is SO.

Oh, have I not fled a hundred times before these moments, this
deadly delight of my memories, and averted my eyes like a child from
lightning! and yet in the lush garden of the world there grows nothing
lovelier than my joys, yet in heaven and on earth there flourishes nothing
nobler than my joys.

But only to you, my Bellarmin, only to a pure free soul such as yours
do I tell it. I will not be as prodigal as the sun with its rays, I will not cast
my pearls before the foolish mob.

After that last soulful converse I knew myself less with each passing
day. I felt there was a holy secret between me and Diotima.

I marvelled, dreamed. As if some blissful ghost had appeared to me
at midnight and chosen me to walk with him, such was my state of
mind.

Oh, it’s a strange mixture of blissfulness and melancholy when it’s
thus revealed to us that we’re forever removed from ordinary existence.

Since then I’d never managed to see Diotima alone. There’d always
have to be a third person to disturb us, keeping us apart, and the world
lay between her and me like an endless void. Six days of dread passed
in this way without my knowing anything of Diotima. It was as if the
others around us lamed my senses, as if they killed all my outer life, so
that there was no way my locked-in soul could reach across to her.

If I would seek her with my eye, all went black before me, if I would
address a word to her, it was throttled in my throat.

Oh! the holy nameless longing often almost tore my breast asunder,
and mighty love often raged in me like a fettered titan. So deeply, so
wholly implacably my spirit had never strained against the chains
forged for it by fate, against the iron, inexorable law of being divided,
not being a single soul with its desirable other half.

The star-bright night had now become my element. Then when all
was still, as in the depths of the earth where gold in secret grows, it was
then the more beautiful life of my love began.

Now my heart indulged its right to play the poet. It told me how
Hyperion’s spirit, before coming down to earth, had sported in pre-
Elysium with his lovely Diotima, in divine childhood to the harmonies
of the source, and beneath boughs such as we see the boughs of the
earth when gilded they sparkle from golden streams.

And, like the past, the gates of the future opened in me.

Then we flew, Diotima and I, then we wandered like swallows from
one springtime of the world to the next, through the vast realm of the
sun and beyond to the other islands of heaven, to Sirius’ golden shores,
into the ghostly vales of Arcturus —

Oh, this is truly a thing to be desired, drinking the joy of the world
from a single cup with the beloved!

Drunk from the blissful lullaby I sang myself, I fell asleep amidst the
glorious phantoms.

But when the life of the earth took fire again from the ray of the
morning light, I looked up and sought the dreams of the night. Like the
beautiful stars they had vanished, and only the joy of grief bore witness
to them in my soul.

I sorrowed; but I believe that amongst the blissful there’s such
sorrowing too. It was the harbinger of joy, this grief, it was the greying
dawn from which would burgeon the countless roses of the blushing
day. —

The glowing summer’s day had now driven everything into dark
shade. Around Diotima’s house, too, all was still and empty, and at
every window the envious curtains stood in my way.

I lived in thoughts of her. ‘Where are you,’ I thought, ‘where shall
my lonely spirit find you, sweet maiden? Do you gaze into space and
muse? Have you put your work to one side, are you resting your elbow
on your knee and your head on your little hand, yielding yourself to
lovely thoughts?

‘Let nothing disturb my tranquil one when she refreshes her heart
with sweet fancies, let nothing handle this cluster of grapes and graze
the quickening dew from its tender berries!’

So I dreamed. But whilst my thoughts sought her out between the
walls of the house, my feet searched for her elsewhere, and before I
was aware of it I was walking under the archways of the sacred wood
behind Diotima’s garden, where I’d seen her for the first time. What
was this? Since then I’d so often mingled with these trees, become
more intimate with them, more at peace beneath them; now a force
seized me, as if I were stepping into Diana’s shadows to die before the
present deity.

Still I carried on. With every step I felt more wonderfully strange. I
could have taken flight, so strongly did my heart propel me forwards;
but it was as if there were lead in my shoes. My soul had hurried ahead,
leaving my earthly limbs behind. I could no longer hear, and all shapes
dimmed and shimmered before my eyes. My spirit was already with
Diotima; the tree top played in the morning light, while the lower
boughs still felt the chill of dawn.

‘Ah! my Hyperion!’ a voice now called out to me; I rushed towards it;
‘my Diotima! O my Diotima!’ beyond that I had no word and no breath,
no consciousness.

Fade, fade, mortal life, beggarly business where the lonely spirit
keeps inspecting the pennies it’s gathered and counting them over! we
are all called to the joy of the godhead!

Here there’s a gap in my existence. I died, and awoke to find myself
pressed to the heart of the heavenly maiden.

O life of love! how you had burst forth in her in full lovely bloom! as
if sung into gentle slumber by blissful genii, the charming little head lay
on my shoulder, smiled sweet peace, and opened up its aethereal eyes
to me in joyful naive wonder, as if just now for the first time gazing out
into the world.

Long we stood like this in lovely self-forgetful contemplation and
neither knew what came over us, till at last too much joy heaped up in
me, and amidst tears and sounds of rapture my lost speech began again,
and roused my silently entranced Diotima fully back to life.

Then at last we looked again about us.

‘O my old familiar trees!’ cried Diotima, as if she hadn’t seen them
for a long time, and the remembrance of her former lonely days played
about her joys, lovingly, like shadows about the virgin snow when it
blushes and glows in the joyous glory of evening.

‘Angel of heaven!’ I cried, ‘who can grasp you? who can say that he
has fully comprehended you?’

‘Do you wonder,’ she replied, ‘that I’m so very fond of you. Dear
man! proud and modest man! Do you think I too am one of those who
can’t believe in you, have I not fathomed you, have I not found out the
genius in his clouds? Veil yourself all you like and don’t see yourself; I
will conjure you forth, I will —

‘But he’s already here, he’s burst forth like a star; he’s broken through
the husk and stands there like the spring; like a crystal stream from the
gloomy grotto he’s burst forth; this is not the dismal Hyperion, this is
not the wild grief any more — O my own, my glorious boy!’

All this was like a dream to me. Could I believe in this miracle of
love? could I? the joy would have killed me.

‘Divine Diotima!’ I cried, ‘are your words meant for me? can you so
deny yourself, you so blissfully self-sufficient! how can you take such
joy in me? Oh, I see it now, I know now what I’ve often sensed, man is
a garment that often a god wraps round himself, a chalice into which
heaven pours its nectar so that its children may taste of the best.’ —

‘Yes, yes!’ she broke in with an enthused smile, ‘your namesake, the
glorious Hyperion of heaven is in you.’

‘Let me,’ I cried, ‘let me be yours, let me forget myself, let all life
in me and all spirit fly only to you; to you alone, in blissful endless
contemplation! O Diotima! so too I once stood before the shadowy
divine effigy that my love fashioned for itself, before the idol of my
lonely dreams; I nourished it lovingly; with my life I quickened it, with
the hopes of my heart I refreshed it, warmed it, but it gave me nothing
save what I'd given, and when I grew poor it left me poor, and now! now
I have you in my arms and feel the breath of your breast, and feel your
eyes in my eyes, this beautiful presence seeps into all of my senses, and
I can sustain it, I hold what’s most glorious and tremble no more — yes!
I’m truly not who I used to be, Diotima! I’m become like you, and divine
now plays with divine, as children play among themselves. —’

‘But still you must grow a little calmer,’ she said.

‘You're right, you lovable creature!’ I joyfully cried, ‘else the graces
won’t appear to me; else I'll not see in the sea of beauty its gentle lovely
ripples. Oh, I will yet learn to overlook nothing about you. Just give me
time!’

‘Flatterer!’ she cried, ‘but we’re finished for today, dear flatterer! the
golden cloud of evening is my reminder. Oh, don’t be sad! Preserve
for you and me the pure joy! Let it echo in you till the morrow, and
don’t kill it with ill humour! — the flowers of the heart want loving
care. Their roots are everywhere, but they themselves only flourish in
cheerful weather. Farewell, Hyperion!’

She tore herself loose. My whole being flamed up in me as she faded
from view in her glowing beauty.

‘O you!’ — I cried and rushed headlong after her and gave my soul
into her hand in endless kisses.

‘God!’ she cried, ‘what will become of this!’

That hit me. ‘Forgive me, heavenly one!’ I said; ‘I’m going. Good
night, Diotima! think of me a little!’

‘I will, she cried, ‘good night!’

And now not a word more, Bellarmin! It would be too much for my
long-suffering heart. I’m shaken, I feel. But I will go out amongst the
plants and trees and lay me down amongst them, and pray that nature
bring me to such tranquillity.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXIX]

Our souls now lived ever more freely and beautifully together, and
everything in and around us commingled into golden peace. It seemed
as if the old world had died and a new one were beginning with us, so
spiritual and strong and loving and light had everything become, and
we and all beings floated in blissful union, like a chorus of a thousand
inseparable tones, through the boundless aether.

Our converse glided away like a cerulean stream whence the gold-
sand now and then glitters, and our silence was like the silence of
mountain-peaks where in glorious lonely height, far above the realm of
the storms, only the divine breeze whispers still in the locks of the bold
wanderer.

And the wonderful holy sorrow when the hour of parting rang into
our rapture, when often I cried: ‘now we are mortal again, Diotima!’
and she said to me: ‘Mortality is illusion, it’s like the colours that quiver
before our eye when it looks long into the sun!’

Oh! and all the sweet games of love! the pretty speeches, the petty
worries, the touchiness, the strictness and indulgence.

And the omniscience with which we saw through one another, and
the infinite faith with which we glorified one another!

Yes! man is a sun, all-seeing, all-illuming when he loves, and if he
doesn’t he’s a dark dwelling in which there burns a reekie little lamp.

I ought to keep silent, ought to forget and keep silent.

But the alluring flame will tempt me till I plunge into it whole and
perish like the fly.

In the midst of all this blissful wholehearted giving and taking, I felt
one day that Diotima was becoming stiller and ever stiller.

I asked and I begged; but this only seemed to distance her the more;
finally she begged that I no longer ask, that I should go, and speak of
something else when I returned. This brought about a painful dumbness
in me too, which I myself couldn’t come to grips with.

I felt as if an unfathomable sudden fate had sworn death to our love,
and all life was gone, from me and everything.

It’s true I was ashamed of this; I knew for sure that Diotima’s heart
was not ruled by caprice. But always she remained a mystery to me,
and my spoiled despondent disposition demanded that love be always

palpable and present; locked-up treasures were treasures lost for me.
Oh! in my happiness Id unlearned hope, I was then still like impatient
children who cry over the apple on the tree as though it weren’t there
at all unless it’s kissing their mouths. I had no peace, again I begged,
violently and meekly, tenderly and angrily, love armed me with all of
its all-overpowering humble eloquence and now — O my Diotima! now
[had it, the delightful confession, now I have and will hold it till the tide
of love carries me too, with all that I am, back to the ancient home, into
the womb of nature.

The innocent! she’d yet to know the powerful abundance of her
heart, and sweetly dismayed at the wealth within her, she buried it deep
in her breast — and when she now confessed, holy simplicity, when she
confessed with tears that she loved too much, and when she took leave
from all she’d cradled till then to her heart, oh, when she cried: ‘I’ve
fallen away from May and summer and autumn, and don’t heed the
day and the night as once I did, don’t belong any longer to heaven and
earth, belong just to one, only to one, but the blossom of May and the
flame of summer and the ripeness of autumn, the lightness of day and
the gravity of night, and earth and heaven, all is fused for me into this
one! so do I love!’ — and when she now looked at me, in the fullness
of her heart’s content, when she, in bold and holy joy, took me into her
beautiful arms and kissed me on brow and mouth, oh! when that divine
head, dying in bliss, slipped down my open neck, and those lovely lips
rested on my beating breast and the sweet breath touched my soul — O
Bellarmin! my senses fail and my mind runs adrift.

I see, I see how this must end. The rudder has fallen into the surge
and the ship will be seized like a child by the feet and hurled against
the rocks.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXX]

There are in life great hours. We look up to them like colossal figures
of the future and antiquity, we fight a glorious fight with them, and
should we hold our own against them, they then become like sisters and
never leave us.

Once we sat together on our mountain, on a stone of the ancient city
of this island, and spoke of how here the lion Demosthenes had found his

end, how he’d here with holy self-elected death helped himself to freedom
from the Macedonian chains and daggers — ‘That glorious spirit went
from this world with a jest,’ one of us cried. ‘And why not?’ I said, ‘there
was nothing more for him here; Athens had become Alexander’s whore
and the world, like a hart, hounded to death by the great huntsman.’

‘O Athens!’ cried Diotima; ‘there’s many a time I’ve grieved when I
gazed across and out of the blue twilight the phantom of the Olympieion
rose before me!’

‘How far is it to get there?’ I asked

‘A day’s journey, perhaps,’ Diotima replied.

‘A day’s journey,’ I cried, ‘and I haven’t been there yet? We must go
across together straightaway.’

‘Right then!’ cried Diotima; ‘we shall have a fair sea tomorrow, and
all’s now still greenness and ripeness.

‘One needs the eternal sun and the life of the immortal earth for such
a pilgrimage.’

‘Tomorrow then!’ I said, and our friends agreed.

Early, to the rooster’s song, we set out from the roadstead. We and
the world were shining in fresh brilliance. Golden peaceful youth was in
our hearts. The life in us was like a newborn isle of the ocean in which
the first spring is beginning.

For some time now, under Diotima’s influence, more stability had
come into my soul; today I felt it with threefold purity, and the scattered
swarming energies were all gathered in one single golden mean.

We spoke together about the excellence of the ancient Athenians,
how it arose, in what it consisted.

One said it was the climate that made it; another: art and philosophy;
a third: religion and polity.

‘Athenian art and religion, and philosophy and polity,’ I said, ‘are
flowers and fruits of the tree, not the soil and the roots. You take the
effects for the cause.

‘And anyone who tells me that this was all shaped by the climate
should consider that we too still live in it.

‘Less disturbed in every respect, freer from violent influence than
any other people on earth, so grew the people of the Athenians. No
conqueror weakens them, no military fortune inebriates them, no alien
cult dulls them, no hasty wisdom drives them to untimely ripeness.

Left to itself, like the growing diamond, such is their childhood. Almost
nothing is heard of them up to the times of Pisistratus and Hipparchus.
They took but little part in the Trojan War which, as in a hothouse,
prematurely kindled and quickened most of the Greek peoples. — It’s
not extraordinary fate that brings forth man. Great and colossal are the
sons of such a mother, but beautiful beings, or, what is the same thing,
men they never become, or not until late when the contrasts war with
each other too harshly for them not to make peace in the end.

‘In exuberant vigour Lacedaemon rushes ahead of the Athenians and
for this very reason would also have scattered and dissolved sooner, had
not Lycurgus come and with his discipline contained its intemperate
nature. And so from then on everything about the Spartan was
acquired, all excellence achieved and bought through labour and self-
conscious effort, and in as much as one can, in a certain sense, speak of
the simplicity of the Spartans, yet it follows naturally that true childlike
simplicity was wholly lacking amongst them. The Lacedaemonians
breached too soon the order of instinct, they grew out of kind too soon,
and so then, with them, discipline too had to begin too soon; for all
discipline and art begins too soon where man’s nature hasn’t yet come
to ripeness. Perfected nature must dwell in the human child before it
enters school, so that the image of childhood may show it the way back
from school to perfected nature.

‘The Spartans remained eternally a fragment; for whoever was never
a finished child can hardly become a finished man. —

‘True, heaven and earth also did their part for the Athenians, as for
all the Greeks, dispensing neither dearth nor abundance. The rays of
heaven didn’t fall upon them like a rain of fire. The earth didn’t pamper
and ravish them with caresses and lavish gifts as here and there the
foolish mother otherwise may do.

‘And then there was the prodigious gesture of Theseus, the voluntary
curtailment of his own monarchic power.

‘Oh! such a seed, thrown into the hearts of the people, must beget an
ocean of golden grains, and visibly continues even late to burgeon and
bear fruit amongst the Athenians.

‘Once again then! that the Athenians grew up so free from violent
influence of any kind, on such moderate fare, this is what made them so
excellent, and this alone could!

‘Leave man undisturbed from the cradle on! don’t drive him from the
enclosing oneness of his being’s bud, out of his childhood’s tabernacle!
don’t do too little lest he manage without you and so distinguish you
from himself, don’t do too much lest he feel your power or his own and
so distinguish you from himself, in short, don’t let man know until late
that there are men, that there is something outside himself, for only in
this way will he become man. But man is a god as soon as he’s man. And
once he’s a god, then he’s beautiful.’

‘Strange!’ cried one of the friends.

‘You've never yet spoken so deeply from my soul,’ cried Diotima.

‘I owe it to you,’ I answered.

‘That’s how the Athenian was man,’ I continued, ‘that’s how he had
to become man. Beautiful he came from the hands of nature, beautiful
in body and soul, as the saying goes.

‘The first child of human, of divine beauty is art. In art divine man
renews and repeats himself. He wants to feel himself, and so he confronts
himself with his own beauty. Thus man gave himself his gods. For in the
beginning man and his gods were one, when, unknown to itself, eternal
beauty was. — I’m speaking mysteries, but they are. —

‘The first child of divine beauty is art. So it was with the Athenians.

‘Beauty’s second daughter is religion. Religion is love of beauty. The
wise man loves beauty itself, infinite and all-embracing; the people love
its children, the gods, who appear to them in multifarious forms. So it
was too with the Athenians. And without such love of beauty, without
such religion any state is a shrivelled skeleton without life and spirit,
and all thought and deed a tree without a top, a column whose crown
has been lopped off.

‘But that it was really the case with the Greeks, and especially the
Athenians, that their art and their religion are the true children of eternal
beauty — of perfected human nature — and could issue only from
perfected human nature, that is clearly evident if one is only willing
to consider with an unbiased eye the objects of their holy art and the
religion with which they loved and honoured those objects.

‘There are blunders and blemishes everywhere, and so here too.
But one thing is certain withal: what one finds in the objects of their
art is mostly ripened man. Here there’s not the pettiness, not the
monstrousness of the Egyptians and Goths, here there’s human sense

and human form. They sheer off less than others into the extremes of the
supersensual and the sensual. Their gods stay more than others within
the beautiful mean of man.

‘And as the object, so also the love. Not too servile and not all too
familiar! —

‘From the Athenians’ beauty of spirit there followed too the necessary
feeling for freedom.

‘The Egyptian bears without pain the despotism of arbitrary power,
the son of the North without resentment the despotism of the law,
legally enshrined injustice; for the Egyptian possesses from the womb
an instinct for servility and idolatry; in the North they have too little
faith in the pure free life of nature not to be superstitiously thralled to
legality.

‘The Athenian can’t abide arbitrary power because his divine nature
brooks no disturbance, he can’t abide legality everywhere because he
has no need of it everywhere. Draco isn’t for him. He expects to be
treated gently, and has every right to do so too.’

‘Fair enough!’ someone interjected, ‘that I understand, but how this
poetic religious people should also come to be a philosophical one, that
I don’t see.’

‘Without poetry,’ I said, ‘they would never even have been a
philosophical people!’

‘What has philosophy,’ he responded, ‘what has the cold sublimity
of that science to do with poetry?’

‘Poetry,’ I said, sure of my case, ‘is the beginning and end of that
science. Like Minerva from Jupiter’s head it springs from the poetry of
infinite divine being. And so too what is irreconcilable in it will finally
flow together again in the mysterious wellspring of poetry.’

‘He’s a paradoxical fellow,’ cried Diotima, ‘yet I sense his meaning.
You're both digressing though. It’s Athens we’re talking about.’

‘The man,’ I began again, ‘who has not at least once in his life felt
in himself full unsullied beauty, when the powers of his being played
into one another like the colours of the rainbow, who has never come to
know that only in hours of inspiration all is inmost concord, this man
will not even become a philosophical sceptic, his spirit is not even fitted
for tearing down, let alone for building up. For believe you me, the
sceptic finds flaws and contradiction in all that is thought only because

he knows the harmony of flawless beauty that never is thought. He
disdains the dry crust that human reason proffers him well-meaningly
only because he’s secretly feasting at the table of the gods.’

‘Dreamer!’ cried Diotima, ‘that’s why you too were a sceptic. But the
Athenians!’

‘I was just coming to them,’ I said. ‘The mighty phrase of Heraclitus,
ev dtadEeQov eautw (the One differentiated in itself), could have been
arrived at only by a Greek, for it is the essence of beauty and before that
was found, there was no philosophy.

‘Now one could define, the whole was there. The flower had ripened,
one could now dissect.

‘The moment of beauty had now been made known among men, it
was there in life and spirit, infinite oneness was.

‘One could take it apart, divide it in the mind, think the divided
together afresh, could so come more and more to know the essence
of the highest and the best and turn that knowledge into laws for the
manifold realms of the mind.

‘Do you see now why the Athenians in particular had also to be a
philosophical people?

‘The Egyptian couldn’t. He who doesn’t live loving, and loved by,
heaven and earth in equal measure, who doesn’t in this sense live at
one with the element in which he moves, is by nature also not so at one
with himself and cannot know eternal beauty, at least not so readily as
a Greek.

‘Like a sumptuous despot the oriental clime prostrates its inhabitants
with its power and its splendour, and before man has even learned to
walk he must kneel, before he has learned to talk he must pray; before
his heart has found its balance it must bow, and before the spirit is
strong enough to bear flower and fruit, fate and nature sap from it
all strength with searing heat. The Egyptian’s surrendered before he’s
a whole, and so he knows nothing of the whole, nothing of beauty,
and what he calls the highest is a veiled power, a ghastly enigma;
the dumb dismal Isis is his alpha and omega, an empty infinity, and
nought meaningful ever came out of that. Even the sublimest nothing
begets nothing.

‘The North, by contrast, drives its nurslings into themselves too
soon, and if the spirit of the fiery Egyptian, too wanderlusting, rushes

out into the world, in the North the spirit prepares to return into itself
before it’s even ready to fare forth.

‘In the North man must already have sense before even there’s any
ripe feeling within him, he imputes to himself the guilt of all things
before innocence even has come to its beautiful end; he must become
rational, a self-conscious spirit, before he’s a man, a worldly-wise man
before he’s a child; the harmony of whole human being, beauty, may
not blossom and ripen in him before he’s developed and cultured. Mere
understanding, mere reason are ever the kings of the North.

‘But from mere understanding there never came anything sensible,
from mere reason never came anything rational.

‘Understanding without beauty of spirit is like a ministering menial
who fashions the fence from rough timber, according to plans he’s been
given, and nails together the posts that he’s hewn for the garden his
master wants to make. The understanding’s whole business is work of
necessity. By laying down rules it guards us from folly and wrongness;
but being safe from folly and wrongness is not the pinnacle of human
excellence.

‘Reason without beauty of spirit, beauty of heart, is like a slave-
driver whom the master of the house has set over the servants; he
knows as little as the servants what good is served by all the endless
toil, and only shouts: ‘Get a move on,’ and is almost loath to see it
happen, for in the end he’d have no more driving to do and his part
would be played out.

‘From mere understanding comes no philosophy, for philosophy is
more than only the limited perception of what is.

‘From mere reason comes no philosophy, for philosophy is more
than the blind demand for never-ending progress in the unification and
differentiation of whatever it can be applied to.

‘But when the divine ev dladegov eavtw, the ideal of beauty
illumines striving reason, it doesn’t demand blindly, it knows why it
demands and for what.

‘When, like a May morning into the artist’s workshop, the sun of
the beautiful shines for the understanding in its activity, it’s true that it
doesn’t rush forth and abandon its work of necessity, yet still it thinks
fondly forward to the festal day when it will wander in the quickening
light of spring.’

This was as far as I’d got when we landed on the coast of Attica.
Ancient Athens now was too much in our minds for us to feel much like
orderly talk, and I wondered now myself at the nature of my utterances.
‘How ever did I come,’ I cried, ‘to fetch up on those barren mountain
peaks on which you saw me?’

‘It’s always like that,’ replied Diotima, ‘when we're feeling elated.
Exuberant energy looks to find work. Young lambs butt their heads
together when they’ve had their fill of mother’s milk.’

We now made our way up Lycabettus, for all our haste stopping at
times in thought and wonderful anticipation.

It’s good that man finds it so hard to convince himself of the death
of what he loves, and likely no one has ever gone to his friend’s grave
without some quiet hope of actually meeting the friend there. The
beautiful phantom of ancient Athens seized me like the shape of a
mother returning from the realm of dead.

‘O Parthenon’ I cried, ‘pride of the world! at your feet lies Neptune’s
realm like a vanquished lion, and like children the other temples
are gathered around you, and the eloquent Agora and the grove of
Academe — ’

‘Can you transport yourself so into the ancient times,’ said Diotima.

‘Don’t remind me of those times!’ I replied; ‘there was divine life
and man was the central point of nature. Spring, when it blossomed all
around Athens, it was like a demure flower at the virgin’s bosom; the
sun rose red with shame over the glories of the earth.

‘The marble rocks of Hymettus and Pentelikon leapt from their
slumbering cradle like children from the mother’s womb, and took on
form and life under the delicate hands of the Athenians.

‘Nature proffered honey, and the fairest violets and myrtles and
olives.

‘Nature was priestess and man her god, and all the life in her and
every shape and every sound of hers but a single rapturous echo of the
glorious being to whom she belonged.

“Him alone she celebrated, to him alone she sacrificed.

‘And he was worthy of it, whether he sat lovingly in the holy
workshop, embracing the knees of the divine image he’d made, or on
the headland, on Sunium’s green peak, ensconced amidst the listening
disciples, whiling away the hours with lofty thoughts, or he might be

running in the Stadium, or from the speaker’s tribune dispensing, like
the storm god, rain and sun and lightning bolts and golden clouds —’

‘Oh look!’ Diotima now suddenly called out to me.

I looked, and could have died at the almighty spectacle.

Like a vast shipwreck when the storms are silenced and the sailors
flown, and the body of the shattered fleet lies unrecognizable upon
the sandbank, so lay before us Athens, and the orphaned pillars stood
before us like the naked tree trunks of a forest which greened still in the
evening and then went up in fire in the night.

‘Here,’ said Diotima, ‘you learn to be still about your own fate, be it
good or ill.’

‘Here you learn to be still about everything,’ I continued. ‘Had the
reapers who mowed this cornfield enriched their barns with its haulms,
nothing would have been lost and I should be content to stand here as a
gleaner; but who gained by it?’

‘All of Europe,’ replied one of the friends.

‘Oh, yes!’ I cried, ‘they’ve hauled off the pillars and statues and sold
them to each other, prizing the noble figures not a little on account of
their rarity, the way one prizes parrots and monkeys.’

‘Don’t say that!’ replied the same man; ‘and should they really lack
the spirit of all the beauty, it would be because that couldn’t be carried
away, couldn’t be bought.’

‘Quite!’ I cried. ‘For that spirit had perished even before the destroyers
fell upon Attica. Only when the houses and temples are desolate do the
wild beasts venture into the gates and streets.’

‘For anyone who does have that spirit,’ said Diotima consolingly,
‘Athens still stands like a fruit tree in bloom. The artist can easily for
himself restore the torso to wholeness.’

The next day we went out early, saw the ruins of the Parthenon, the
site of the ancient theatre of Bacchus, the temple of Theseus, the sixteen
columns that still remain standing of the divine Olympieion; but what
most moved me was the ancient gate through which in former times
one came out of the old town into the new, and where once a thousand
beautiful people must have greeted each other in a single day. Now you
come neither into the old nor into the new city through this gate, and
mute and waste it stands there like a dried-up fountain from whose
pipes the clear fresh water once sprang forth with a friendly plash.

‘Alas!’ I said, as we went walking round, ‘it’s a splendid game
fate plays, is it not, toppling down the temples here and leaving the
shattered stones for children to throw about, making the mutilated
gods into benches before the peasant’s hut and the tombs here a resting-
place for the grazing bull, and such prodigality is more regal than the
wantonness of Cleopatra when she drank the molten pearls; but even
so, the pity of all that grandeur and beauty!’

‘Dear Hyperion!’ cried Diotima, ‘it’s time for you to leave; you’re
pale and your eyes are weary, and it’s useless trying to help yourself
with fancies. Come away! out into the green! in amongst the colours of
life! that will do you good.’

We went out into the nearby gardens.

The others had fallen into conversation on the way with two British
scholars reaping their harvest among the antiquities of Athens, and they
were not to be budged. I was happy to leave them to it.

My whole being was uplifted when once again I saw myself alone
with Diotima; in a glorious struggle with the sacred chaos of Athens she
had prevailed. Like the lyre of the heavenly muse above the warring
elements, so Diotima’s still thoughts held sway above the wreckage.
Like the moon from a tender cloud, so her spirit rose up from sweet
sorrow; the heavenly maiden stood there in her sadness like the flower
that breathes out its loveliest fragrance in the night.

On and on we walked, and in the end our walk was not in vain.

O you groves of Angele where the olive tree and the cypress,
whispering round one another, cool themselves with friendly shade,
where the golden fruit of the citron tree gleams through the dark green,
where the swelling grape grows wantonly over the hedge, and the ripe
orange, like a smiling foundling, lies on the way! you fragrant hidden
paths! you tranquil seats where the image of the myrtle bush smiles
from the spring! you I shall never forget.

Diotima and I walked about for a while beneath the glorious trees
until a large cheerful glade opened up before us.

Here we sat down. There was a blissful stillness between us. My
spirit floated about the divine form of the maiden like the butterfly
about a flower, and all my being lightened and became one in the joy of
inspiring contemplation.

‘Are you so soon comforted again, you lighthead?’ said Diotima.

‘Yes! yes! I am,’ I answered. ‘What I thought was lost I have, what I
languished for, as if it had vanished from the world, is now before me.
No, Diotima! the wellspring of eternal beauty hasn’t yet run dry.

‘I’ve told you once before, I no longer need gods and men. I know
that heaven is desolate and void, and the earth, which once overflowed
with beautiful human life, has almost become like an anthill. But there is
still a place where the old heaven and the old earth smile for me. For all
gods of heaven and all godly humans of earth I forget in you.

‘What's the shipwreck of the world to me, I know of nothing but my
blissful isle.’

‘There’s a time for love,’ said Diotima in gentle earnest, ‘as there’s a
time to live in the happy cradle. But life itself drives us out.

‘Hyperion!’ — here she ardently seized my hand, and her voice was
raised with grandeur — ‘Hyperion! it seems to me that you are born
for higher things. Do not misjudge yourself! it’s the lack of material
that’s held you back. Things didn’t move quickly enough. That cast
you down. Like the young fencers you’d lunge too soon, before your
aim was yet sure and your hand skilled, and since, as is only natural,
you took more hits than you gave, you became chary and doubted
yourself and all things; for you’re as sensitive as you're hotheaded. But
thereby nothing is lost. Had your mind and your actions matured so
early, your spirit would not be what it is; you would not be the thinking
man, had you not been the suffering one, the man in ferment. Believe
me, you would never so clearly have come to know the equilibrium
of beautiful humanity, had you not so utterly lost it. Your heart has
found peace at last. I’ll believe it. I understand it. But do you really
think you’ve now reached your end? Will you lock yourself up in the
heaven of your love and leave a world which has need of you to wither
and grow cold beneath you? Down you must like the ray of light, like
the all-refreshing rain you must descend into the land of mortality,
you must illumine like Apollo, shake and quicken like Jupiter, or you
are not worthy of your heaven. I beg you, go back into Athens once
again, and this time look at the people there walking about amongst
the ruins, the raw Albanians and the other good artless Greeks, who
console themselves with a merry dance and a pious fable for the vile
oppression that weighs down on them — can you say: “I’m ashamed
of this material”? I think it could still prove malleable after all. Can

you turn away your heart from those in need? They’re not evil, they’ve
done you no harm!’

‘What can I do for them?’ I cried.

‘Give them what you have within you,’ Diotima replied, ‘give — ’

‘Not a word, not a word more, great soul!’ I cried, ‘else you will sway
me, else it will be as if you’d forced me to it —

‘They won't be happier, but nobler, no! they'll be happier too. They
must come forth, they must rise like young mountains from the surging
sea, driven by their subterranean fire.

‘It’s true I stand alone and come unrenowned among them. Yet just
one who is a man, can he not do more than hundreds who are only
fragments of men?

‘Holy nature! you are the same within me and without. It cannot be
so hard to unite what is without with the divine that is within me. If the
bee can build its thriving little realm, then why shouldn’t I be able to
plant and raise what’s needed?

‘What? the Arab merchant sowed his Koran and there grew up for
him like an endless forest a people of disciples, and that field should
not also flourish where the ancient truth shall come again in newly
quickened youth?

‘Let there be fundamental change! From humanity’s roots let the
new world spring! Let a new godhead rule over them, a new future
brighten before them.

‘In the workshop, in the home, in the assemblies, in the temples,
everywhere let there be change!

‘But first I must go forth to learn. I’m an artist, but I lack the craft. I
can mould in my mind, but I haven’t yet learned to direct my hand — ’

‘You shall go to Italy,’ said Diotima, ‘to Germany, France — how
many years do you need? three — four — I should think three are
enough; you're not of the slow sort, and will be seeking out only the
greatest and most beautiful —’

‘And then?’

‘You will become the educator of our people, you'll be a great man, I
hope. And when I then embrace you like this, then I’ll dream as if I were
a part of the glorious man, then Tl rejoice as if you had gifted me, like
Pollux to Castor, half of your immortality, oh! I shall become a proud
maiden, Hyperion!’

I fell silent for a while. I was filled with ineffable joy.

‘Is there then contentment between the decision and the deed,’ I
finally resumed, ‘is there a calm before the victory?’

‘It’s the calm of the hero,’ said Diotima, ‘there are decisions which,
like the dicta of the gods, are command and fulfilment in one, and such
is yours. —’

We walked back, as after our first embrace. Everything had become
strange and new for us.

Now I stood over the ruins of Athens like the farmer on the fallow
field. ‘Just lie peaceful,’ I thought, as we took ship again, ‘just lie peaceful,
slumbering land! Soon young life will green from you and wax towards
the blessings of heaven. Soon the clouds will no more rain in vain, soon
the sun will find again its ancient progeny.

‘Do you ask after men, nature? Do you lament like a lyre which the
brother of chance, the wind alone plays, since the artist who kept it in
tune is dead? They will come, your men, nature! A rejuvenated people
will rejuvenate you too, and you will become as its bride, and the ancient
covenant of spirits will renew itself with you.

‘There will be but one beauty; and humanity and nature will unite
into one all-embracing godhead.’

un puvaı, TOV anavra vıxa Aoyov. To O’eTTEL Pavn, Pryvaı XEWEV, ODEV
TLEQ TIXEL, TOAV DEVTEQOD WG TAXLOTA.

SOPHOCLES
[Not to be born is, past all prizing, best. But when a man has seen the light

of day, this is the next best by far, that with the utmost speed he should go
back whence he came.]

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXI]

We were living the last lovely moments of the year, on our return
from Attica.

A brother of spring was the autumn for us, full of mellow fire, a feast
time for commemorating sorrows and past joys of love. The withering
leaves wore the red hues of dusk, only the spruce and the laurel stood
in eternal green. In the bright breezes wandering birds lingered, others
swarmed in vineyard and garden, merrily reaping what people had left.
And the heavenly light streamed pure from the open sky, through all
the branches smiled the holy sun, the goodly, that never I name without
joy and thanks, that often in deep grief has healed me with a glance and
purged my soul of discontent and cares.

We revisited all our dearest paths, Diotima and I, vanished hours of
bliss would meet us everywhere.

We remembered the past May, we’d never before seen the earth as
then, we said, it had been transformed, a silver cloud of blossom, a
joyful flame of life, freed of all coarser stuff.

‘Oh! all was so full of joy and hope,’ cried Diotima, ‘so full of ceaseless
growth and yet so effortless too, so blissfully at peace, like a child lost in
play with not a thought in the world.’

‘It’s by this that I know it, the soul of nature,’ I cried, ‘by this still fire,
by this lingering in its mighty haste.’

‘And it’s so dear to the happy, this lingering,’ cried Diotima; ‘you
remember? we stood together on the bridge one evening, after a violent
storm, and the red mountain torrent shot away like an arrow beneath

us, but beside it the woods were greening in peace and the bright beech
leaves barely stirred. How it warmed our hearts that the soulful green
did not fly away from us too like the stream, and the beautiful spring
held still for us like a tame bird, but now just the same it’s over the hills
and long gone.’

We smiled at the phrase, although we felt more like grieving.

So too our own bliss would pass, and this we foresaw.

O Bellarmin! who then may say he stands fast when even the
beautiful ripens so towards its fate, when even the divine must humble
itself and share mortality with all that is mortal!

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXII]

I'd lingered with the lovely maiden before her house until the lamp
of the night shone into the tranquil twilight; now I came back to Notara’s
dwelling, thoughtful, full of overflowing heroic life, as always when I
went from her embraces. A letter had come from Alabanda.

‘Things are on the move, Hyperion,’ he wrote, ‘Russia has declared
war on the Porte; they’re coming with a fleet into the Archipelago;? the
Greeks shall be free if they join the uprising to drive the Sultan to the
Euphrates. The Greeks will do their part, the Greeks will be free and I’m
heartily glad that there’s finally something to do again. I couldn’t face
the light of day before we got as far as this.

‘If you're still the old Hyperion, then come! You'll find me in the
village before Coron when you come by way of Mistra. I’m staying on
the hill, in the white villa by the woods.

‘T’ve broken with the people whom you met with me in Smyrna. You
were right, with your finer sense, not to step into their sphere.

‘I long to see us both together again in the new life. Until now the
world was too wretched for you to make yourself known to it. Since
you wouldn’t do bondsman’s work you did nothing, and doing nothing
made you dreamy and morose.

‘You wouldn’t swim in the swamp. Come now, come, and let us
bathe in open sea!

‘That shall do us good, my sole beloved!’

3 [Hölderlin’s note] In the year 1770.

So he wrote. At first I was taken aback. My face burned with shame,
my heart seethed like hot springs, and I couldn’t keep still, so did it pain
me to be outflown by Alabanda, bested once and for all. Yet all the more
eagerly did I now embrace the work ahead. —

‘ve grown too idle,’ I cried, ‘too fond of the quiet life, too fey,
too sluggish! — Alabanda looks out into the world like a noble pilot,
Alabanda is busy and searches the waves for booty; and your hands are
asleep in your lap? and you would make do with words and conjure the
world with magic formulas? But your words are feckless as snowflakes
and merely make the air murkier, and your incantations are for the
pious, but the unbelievers don’t hear you. — Yes! to be gentle in season,
that may be a beautiful thing, but to be gentle out of season, that’s ugly,
because it’s cowardly! — But Harmodius! it’s your myrtle I will be like,
your myrtle in which the sword was concealed. I will not have walked
in idleness for nothing, and my sleep shall become like oil when it’s
touched by the flame. I will not look on when it counts, will not go
around asking for news when Alabanda takes the laurel.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXIII]

Diotima’s sudden pallor, when she read Alabanda’s letter, pierced my
soul. She then began, calmly and earnestly, to advise me against this step,
and we spoke much back and forth. ‘O you men of violence!’ she cried
at last, ‘you who are so quick to go to the extreme, remember Nemesis!’

‘For those who suffer extremes,’ I said, ‘for them extreme is right.’

‘Even if it’s right,’ she said, ‘it’s not what you were born for.’

‘So it would seem,’ I said, ‘I’ve loitered long enough. Oh, Id like to
load an Atlas on my shoulders to discharge the debts of my youth. Do I
have a sense of myself? do I have inner stability? Oh, let me go, Diotima!
It’s here, in just such work as this, that I must gain it.’

‘That’s sheer hubris!’ Diotima cried; ‘you were lately more modest,
lately when you said: “first I must go forth to learn”.’

‘Dear sophist!’ I cried, ‘our talk then was of something completely
different. Leading my people to the Olympus of divine beauty, where
from springs for ever young there flows the true with all things good,
is something I’m not yet fit to do. But I’ve learnt to use a sword, and for
now that’s all that’s needed. The new covenant of spirits can’t live in the

air, the holy theocracy of the beautiful must have a free state to live in,
and that demands space on earth and this space we shall surely conquer.’

‘You will conquer,’ cried Diotima, ‘and forget what for? at best you'll
force your free state into being and then say: “for what have I built?”
Oh! it will have been consumed, all the beautiful life that was to stir
there will have been spent, even in you! The savage struggle will tear
you apart, beautiful soul, you will grow old, blissful spirit! and life-
weary ask at the end, “where are you now, you ideals of my youth?”’

‘That’s cruel, Diotima,’ I cried, ‘grasping the heart in this way,
holding me fast by my own fear of death, by my highest joy of life, but
no! no! no! bondage kills, but a just war brings every soul alive. It’s what
gives to gold the colour of the sun, that it gets thrown into the fire! This
and only this gives to man his whole youth, that he bursts his bonds
asunder! It’s this alone can save him, that he goes forth and crushes
the viper underfoot, the crawling century that poisons in the bud all
beautiful nature! — You say I'll grow old, Diotima! if I liberate Greece?
grow old and wretched, a mean little man? Oh, then he must have
been right sapless and empty and godforsaken, that Athenian youth,
the victory messenger from Marathon, when he came over the peak of
Pentelikon and looked down into the vales of Attica!’

‘Dearest! dearest!’ cried Diotima, ‘be still! I won’t say another word.
You shall go, you shall go, proud man! Oh! when you're like this I have
no power, no claim over you.’

She wept bitterly and I stood before her like a criminal. ‘Forgive me,
divine maiden!’ I cried, sunk down before her, ‘oh, forgive me that I
must! I’m not making a choice, I’m not deliberating. There’s a power
within me and I cannot tell if it’s my self that drives me to this step.’ ‘It’s
your full soul that commands you,’ she answered. ‘Not to follow it often
leads to ruin, but then following it likely does too. It’s best you go, for
that is greater. You act; I will bear it.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXIV]

Diotima was from now on marvellously changed.

With joy I’d seen how since our love began the muted life had opened
out in glances and lovely words, and her genial tranquillity had often
met me as sparkling inspiration.

But how alien to us grows the beautiful soul when after its first
blossoming, after the morning of its course, it must rise toward high
noon! One barely knew the blissful child any more, so sublime and so
sorrowful had she become.

Oh, how many times I lay before that grieving image of divinity
and thought to weep away my soul in pain for her, and stood up in
wonderment and myself full of all-powerful energies! A flame had risen
to her eyes from her oppressed breast. Her bosom had grown for her too
crowded with wishes and sorrows; that’s why the maiden’s thoughts
were so glorious and bold. A new greatness, a visible power over all that
could feel, held sway within her. She was a higher being. She belonged
no more to mortal man.

O my Diotima, could I have imagined then how it would end?

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXV]

Even canny Notara was captivated by the new project, promised me
strong backing, hoped soon to occupy the Corinthian Isthmus and grasp
Greece here as by the helve. But fate willed otherwise and rendered his
work futile before it reached its goal.

He advised me not to go to Tinos, but to head straight down the
Peloponnese, and as unobtrusively as possible. I should write to my
father on the way, he said; the cautious old man would more easily
condone a step that had been taken than allow one that hadn’t. I wasn’t
wholly at ease with that, but we so readily sacrifice our own feelings
when a great goal stands before our eyes.

‘I doubt,’ continued Notara, ‘whether you'll be able to count on your
father’s help in a case like this. So I shall give you what you're surely
going to need along the way so as to live and do your work for a time,
come what may. If you can someday, then pay it back; if not, then what
was mine was also yours. Don’t be ashamed to take the money,’ he
added with a smile; ‘even the steeds of Phoebus don’t live on air alone,
so the poets tell us.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXVI]

Now came the day of parting.

Throughout the morning I’d remained up in Notara’s garden, in
the fresh winter air, beneath the evergreen cypresses and cedars. I was
composed. The great energies of youth sustained me, and the suffering
I sensed bore me aloft like a cloud.

Diotima’s mother had asked that Notara and the other friends and I
should spend the last day together at her home. The good people all had
taken their joy in me and Diotima, and what was godly in our love had
not been lost on them. They were now to bless my leaving too.

I went down. I found the dear maiden at the hearth. It seemed for her
a holy priestly office to tend to the house on this day. She had prepared
everything, made everything in the house beautiful, and no one was
allowed to help. She had gathered all the flowers that still remained in
the garden, and managed to put together roses and fresh grapes even in
this late season.

She knew my footfall when I approached, and came softly towards
me; her pale cheeks glowed from the flame of the hearth and her earnest
swollen eyes were glistening from tears. She saw how overcome I was.
‘Go in, my dear,’ she said, ‘mother’s inside and I shall follow shortly.’

I went in. There the noble woman sat and held out her lovely hand
to me — ‘are you come,’ she cried, ‘are you come, my son! I should
be angry with you, you have taken my child from me, have talked all
reason and sense out of me, and you do what you list and make off; but
forgive him, you heavenly powers! if what he intends is wrong, and if
it is right, oh, then do not hold back with your help for the dear youth!’
I wanted to speak, but just then Notara came in with the other friends
and behind them Diotima.

We were silent for a while. We honoured the grieving love that was
in us all, we were fearful to make free with it in speeches and lofty
thoughts. Finally, after a few fleeting words, Diotima asked me to tell
of Agis and Cleomenes: I’d often mentioned those great souls with
fiery reverence and claimed that they were demi-gods as surely as
Prometheus, and their struggle with the fate of Sparta more heroic than
any in the lustrous myths. The genius of these men, Id said, was the
golden sunset of the Greek day, just as Homer and Theseus had been
its aurora.

I told their story and at the end we all felt stronger and uplifted.

‘Happy the man,’ cried one of the friends, ‘whose life alternates
between heartfelt joy and fresh battles.’

‘Yes!’ cried another, ‘that is eternal youth when there are always
ample energies at play and we can keep ourselves wholly in pleasure
and toil.’

‘Oh, that I could go with you!’ Diotima cried to me.

‘But it’s good you stay behind, Diotima!’ I said. ‘The priestess may
not leave the temple. You shall be the keeper of the holy flame, in quiet
seclusion the keeper of the beautiful, that I may find it again in you.’

‘Yes, you're right, my dear, that’s best,’ she said, and her voice
trembled and her ethereal eyes were hidden behind her handkerchief,
so their tears, their confusion shouldn’t be seen.

O Bellarmin! it almost tore my breast asunder to have made her so
blush with shame. ‘Friends!’ I cried, ‘keep this angel safe for me. I can be
sure of nothing more if I can’t be sure of her. O heaven! I dread to think
what I could do if I were to lose her.’

‘Be calm, Hyperion!’ Notara interjected.

‘Calm?’ I cried; ‘O you good people! you're ready enough to worry
how the garden’s going to bloom or what the harvest will be like, you’re
capable of praying for your vines, and I’m supposed to part without
wishes from the only thing my soul serves?’

‘No, good Hyperion!’ cried Notara, moved, ‘no! you shall not part
from her without wishes! no, by the godly innocence of your love! of my
blessing you both may be sure.’

‘You remind me,’ I quickly cried. ‘She shall bless us, this dear mother,
with all of you she shall be our witness — come Diotima! your mother
shall hallow our union until the beautiful community, which is our
hope, join us in marriage.’

So I fell upon one knee; with a wide gaze, blushing and solemnly
smiling, she too sank down by my side.

‘Long since, O nature!’ I cried, ‘has our life been one with you, and
heavenly-youthful, like you and all your gods, is our own world become
through love.’

‘In your groves we wandered,’ Diotima continued, ‘and were like
you, by your springs we sat, and were like you; over yon mountains we
went, with your children the stars, like you.’

‘When we were far from one another,’ I cried, ‘when, like a harp’s
whispering, our coming rapture barely began to thrum for us, when
we found one another, when there was no more sleep and all the tones
within us woke into the full chords of life, divine nature! then we were
always like you, and now too when we part and joy dies, we are, like
you, full of sorrow and yet good, therefore a pure mouth shall witness
for us that our love is hallowed and eternal, like you.’

‘I witness to it,’ said the mother.

“We witness to it,’ cried the others.

Now no words remained for us to speak. I felt my heart at its highest;
I felt myself ripe for parting. ‘Now I will forth, dear friends!’ I said, and
the life drained from all their faces. Diotima stood like a marble image
and I felt her hand die in mine. I had killed everything around me, I was
alone and reeled before the boundless silence in which my overflowing
life no longer found a hold.

‘Ohl’ I cried, ‘my heart burns hot within me, and you all stand
there so cold, dear friends! and only the house-gods bend their
ears? — Diotima! — you are silent, you don’t see! — oh, it’s well for you
that you don’t see!’

‘Go then,’ she sighed, ‘it has to be; go then, you dear heart!’

‘O sweet sound from these blissful lips!’ I cried, and stood as in
adoration before the lovely statue — ‘sweet sound! one more time
breathe upon me, dawn one more time, dear light of these eyes!’

‘Don’t speak that way, dearest!’ she cried, ‘speak in more earnest,
speak with more greatness of heart to me!’

I wanted to hold myself back, but I was as ina dream.

‘Woe!’ I cried, ‘this is a parting without return.’

‘You'll kill her,’ cried Notara. ‘See how gentle she is, and you so
beside yourself.’

I looked at her and tears burst from my burning eyes.

‘Farewell then, Diotima!’ I cried, ‘heaven of my love, farewell! — Let
us be strong, dear friends! dear mother! I gave you joy and grief.
Farewell! farewell!’

I staggered forth. Diotima followed me alone.

Evening had come and the stars rose in the heavens. Below the house
we stood in stillness. Eternity was in us, above us. Soft as the aether
Diotima enfolded me. ‘Foolish man, what is separation?’ she whispered
to me mysteriously, with the smile of an immortal.

‘I do feel different now,’ I said, ‘and I cannot tell which of the two is
a dream, my sorrow or my joyfulness.’

‘They both are,’ she answered, ‘and both are good.’

‘Perfect one!’ I cried, ‘Ill speak like you. By the starry heaven shall
we know each other. Let it be the token between me and you for so long
as our lips are mute.’

‘Let it be!’ she said with a lingering tone I’d never heard before — it
was her last. Her image vanished away from me in the twilight, and I
cannot tell if it was really she when I turned for the last time and the
fading figure quivered one more moment before my eyes and then died
into the night.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [XXXVI]J]

Why am I telling you, repeating my pain and stirring up again my
restless youth in me? Isn’t it enough to have gone through mortality
once? why do I not remain still, in the peace of my spirit?

This is why, my Bellarmin! because every breath in life remains dear
to the heart, because all changes in pure nature belong equally to her
beauty. Our soul, when it casts off its mortal experiences and only lives
alone in holy peace, is it not like a leafless tree? like a head without
locks? Dear Bellarmin! I have rested a while; like a child I’ve been living
among the quiet hills of Salamis, mindless of fate and the striving of
men. Much has since changed in my eyes, and now I have peace enough
within me to stay calm at every glance into human life. O friend! in the
end the spirit reconciles us with all things. You won’t believe it, at least
not of me. But I think you should even see from my letters how daily
my soul grows stiller and stiller. And I will go on speaking of it till you
do believe it.

Here are letters from Diotima and me that we wrote to each other
after my parting from Calauria. They are the most precious thing I
confide to you. They are the warmest image from those days of my life.
Of the clamour of war they tell you little. So much the more of my very
own life, and that of course is what you want. And, oh, you must also
see how loved I was. That I could never tell you, that Diotima alone
can tell.

Hyperion to Diotima [XXXVII]

I’ve awoken from the death of parting, my Diotima! fortified, as if
from sleep, my spirit lifts itself up.

I’m writing to you from an Epidaurian mountain peak. There in
the depths your island shimmers distant, Diotima! and out there my
stadium where I must triumph or fall. O Peloponnese! O you springs
of the Eurotas and Alpheus! That’s where it will be decided! Out of the
Spartan forests the ancient genius of the land shall swoop down like an
eagle with our army, as on rushing wings.

My soul is full of lust for deeds and full of love, Diotima, and my eye
gazes out into the Greek valleys as if it might magically command: arise
again, you cities of the gods!

A god must be in me, for I hardly even feel our separation. Like
the blissful shades of Lethe my soul now lives with yours in heavenly
freedom and fate sways over our love no more.

Hyperion to Diotima [XXXVIII]

I’m now in the middle of the Peloponnese. I’m spending tonight
in the same hut where once I stayed when, barely more than a boy, I
roamed through these parts with Adamas. How happily I sat then on the
bench before the house and listened to the tinkling bells of the caravan,
coming from afar, and the plash of the nearby fountain, pouring its
silvery waters into the basin beneath blossoming acacias.

Now I’m happy again. I wander through this land as through
Dodona’s grove, where the oaks resounded with oracles prophesying
glory. I see nothing but deeds, past ones, future ones, even when
I wander from morning till evening under the open sky. Believe me,
anyone travelling through this land who still can thole a yoke upon
his neck, who doesn’t become another Pelopidas, that man is empty of
heart or lacking in sense.

So long this land has slept — so long has time dragged by, like the
river of hell, drumbly and dumb, in desolate idleness?

And yet everything lies ready. The mountain folk hereabout are
full of vengeful energies, couched there like a silent thundercloud that
waits only to be driven by the storm-wind. Diotima! let me breathe the

breath of God among them, let me speak to them a word from the heart,
Diotima. Have no fear! They won’t be so savage. I know raw nature. It
scorns reason, but it’s in league with inspiration. Whoever works with
all his soul will never go astray. He has no need for overthought, for no
force is against him.

Hyperion to Diotima [XXXIX]

Tomorrow I shall be with Alabanda. It’s a delight for me to ask the
way to Coron, and I ask more often than is needed. I wish I could take
the wings of the sun and fly to him, and yet I also like to linger so and
ask myself: how will he be?

The kingly youth! why was I born later? why did I not spring with
him from one cradle? I cannot suffer the difference that’s between us.
Oh, why did I live still like an idle shepherd-boy on Tinos and could
only dream of the likes of him when already he was putting nature
to the test in living labour, already battling sea and wind and all the
elements? did I not also feel impelled towards the bliss of action?

But I will catch him up, I will be swift. By heaven! I’m overripe for
work. My soul will only rage against itself if I don’t soon free myself
through living activity.

Noble maiden! how was I able to stand before you? How did you
find it possible to love such a deedless being.

Hyperion to Diotima [XL]

Ihave him, dearest Diotima!

Light is my breast and swift are my sinews, ha! and the future
lures me, just as a clear watery deep lures us to leap in and cool our
intemperate blood in the bracing bath. But that’s just idle prattle. We’re
dearer to each other than ever, my Alabanda and I. We’re freer together,
and yet there’s all fullness and deepness of life as before.

Oh, how right were those ancient tyrants to forbid friendships like
ours! For then you're as strong as a demi-god and will thole no abuse in
your sphere! —

It was evening when I entered his room. He had just put his work to
one side, sat in a moonlit corner by the window, nursing his thoughts. I

stood in the dark, he didn’t recognize me, glanced perfunctorily in my
direction. Heaven knows who he could have thought I was. ‘So how’s it
going then?’ he cried. ‘Not too bad!’ I said. But my dissembling was in
vain. My voice was full of suppressed rejoicing. ‘What's this?’ he started
up, ‘is it you?’ ‘Of course it is, you blindling!’ I cried, and flew into his
arms. ‘Oh now!’ cried Alabanda at last, ‘now there shall be change,
Hyperion!’

‘T think so too,’ I said, and joyfully shook his hand.

‘Do you still know me then,’ Alabanda continued presently, ‘do
you still have your old pious faith in Alabanda? Generous soul! things
meanwhile haven’t gone as well for me as when I felt myself in the light
of your love.’

‘What?’ I cried, ‘Alabanda asks this? That was not proudly spoken,
Alabanda. But it’s the sign of the times that the old heroic nature goes
begging for honour, and the living human heart, like an orphan, frets
for a droplet of love.’

‘Dear boy!’ he cried; ‘I’ve aged, that’s all. This flabby life everywhere
and the business with the old men whose disciple I tried to make you
in Smyrna —’

‘Oh, that’s bitter,’ I cried; ‘even this man she’s dared to assail, the
goddess of death, the nameless one that they call fate.’

Light was brought and we gazed at each other anew with gentle
loving scrutiny. My dearest’s aspect was much changed since the days
of hope. Like the mid-day sun from a blanched sky, his great ever-living
eye gleamed at me from a faded face.

‘My good young friend!’ Alabanda cried, in friendly irritation at the
gaze I gave him, ‘enough of the doleful looks, there’s a good fellow! I
know full well I’ve gone downhill. O my Hyperion! I long so much for
something great and true, and I hope to find it with you. You’ve grown
beyond me, you're freer and stronger than you were and, believe it not!
that makes me heartily glad. I’m the parched land and you come like a
timely tempest — oh, it’s glorious that you’re here!’

‘Hush!’ I said, ‘you rob me of my senses, and we shouldn’t speak of
ourselves at all until we’re in the thick of life, amidst the deeds.’

‘Quite right!’ cried Alabanda joyously, ‘it’s only when the hunting
horn sounds that the hunters feel fully what they are.’

‘Will it soon begin then?’ I said.

‘It will, cried Alabanda, ‘and I tell you, dear heart! it should be quite
a fire. Ha! may it reach right up to the tip of the tower and melt its vane,
and rage and swirl about until the tower bursts and tumbles! — and
don’t let yourself be put off by our allies. I know full well the good
Russians would like to use us as their guns. But don’t you worry! once
our stout Spartans have had the chance to find out who they are and
what they can do, and when we’ve then conquered the Peloponnese,
we'll laugh the North Pole in the face and build us a life of our own.’

‘A life of our own,’ I cried, ‘a new, an honourable life. Were we then
born of the swamp, like a will-o’-the-wisp, or do we stem from the victors
of Salamis? How is it then now? how have you become a maidservant,
free nature of the Greeks? how have you sunk so low, race of my fathers,
of whom the divine effigies of Jupiter and Apollo were once merely the
copy? — But hear me, heaven of Ionia! hear me, earth of the fatherland,
you that half-naked, like a beggar-woman, wrap yourself in the rags of
your ancient glory, I will thole it no longer!’

‘O sun that reared us!’ cried Alabanda, ‘you shall be witness when
under the toil our mettle grows, when under the blows of fate, like iron
under the hammer, our project takes shape.’

We each of us kindled the other.

‘And let not a blot stick,’ I cried, ‘none of the grotesques the age
smears us with, like the rabble on walls.’

‘Oh,’ cried Alabanda, ‘that’s why war is so good —’

‘Right, Alabanda,’ I cried, ‘like all great work where human energy
and spirit alone helps and no crutch and no waxen wing. Then we shall
cast off the slaves’ livery on which fate has stamped its brand for us —’

‘Then we'll have no more use for anything affected and forced,’
cried Alabanda, ‘then, just as in the Nemean races, we'll go unadorned,
unfettered, naked to our goal.’

‘To our goal,’ I cried, ‘where the young free state dawns and from
Greek earth the pantheon of all that’s beautiful rises.’

Alabanda was silent for a while. A fresh redness rose in his face and
his form grew high, like a plant refreshed.

‘O youth! youth!’ he cried, ‘then will I drink from your fount, then
will I live and love. I’m full of joy, heaven of the night,’ he went on as if
drunk, walking to the window, ‘you arch over me like a bower of vine
leaves, and your stars hang down like grapes.’

Hyperion to Diotima [XLI]

It’s as well for me I’m wholly busy with my work. Id surely tumble
from one folly to another, so full is my soul, so fuddled am I by this
man, wonderful and proud, who loves nothing but me and heaps on
me alone all the humility that’s in him. O Diotima! this Alabanda has
wept before me, has begged me like a child to forgive him what he did
to me in Smyrna.

Who am I then, you dear ones, that I call you mine, that I may say,
‘they are mine own,’ that I stand between you like a conqueror and
embrace you as my booty.

O Diotima! O Alabanda! noble beings, grand, serene! how must I
achieve if I’m not to flee before my happiness, before you?

Just as I was writing I received your letter, dearest.

Do not grieve, lovely being, do not grieve! Save yourself, unscathed
by sorrow, for the future festivals of the fatherland! Diotima! for the
glowing festal day of nature save yourself, and for all the blithe days in
honour of the gods!

Can you not see Greece already?

Oh, can you not see how the eternal stars, glad of their new
neighbours, smile above our towns and groves, how the ancient ocean,
when it sees our people stroll along the shore, is minded again of the
beautiful Athenians and again brings us fortune, just as then for its
darlings, on joyful waves?

Soulful maiden! you're already so beautiful now! how shall you
blossom then, in ravishing glory, when the right climate nourishes you!

Diotima to Hyperion [XLII]

I'd mostly shut myself in since you went away, dear Hyperion!
Today I was once again outdoors.

In the clement February air I’ve gathered life and bring you what I’ve
gathered. It’s still done me good too, the fresh warming of heaven, still
I’ve been able to share in it, the new bliss of the plant world, pure and
ever the same, where everything grieves and joys again in its season.

Hyperion! O my Hyperion! why don’t we also tread the quiet paths
of life? They are holy names, winter and spring and summer and

autumn! but we do not know them. Is it not sin to grieve in spring? why
then do we do it?

Forgive me! the children of the earth live through the sun alone; I live
through you, I have other joys, is it then wonder if I have other grief?
and must I grieve? must I then?

Brave one! dear one! should I wither when you shine? should my
heart wilt when the lust of victory wakes in all your sinews? Had I once
heard that a Greek youth were setting forth to drag our good people
from its shame, to return it to maternal beauty whence it sprang, how I
should have roused from childhood’s dream and thirsted for the image
of the worthy one! and now that he’s here, now that he’s mine, can I
still weep? O silly girl! is it not real? isn’t he that glorious youth, and is
he not mine? O you shades of blissful time, you my beloved memories!

For it seems to me barely yesterday, that magical evening when the
holy stranger met me for the first time, when like a grieving genius he
glanced into the sylvan shades where the carefree maiden sat in the
dream of youth — in the breath of May he came, Ionia’s magical breath
of May, and this made him blossom the more for me, it waved his locks,
it unfolded his lips like flowers, it dissolved into smiles his sorrow, and
O you beams of heaven! how you did shine on me out of those eyes,
those inspiriting springs where in the shade of sheltering arches eternal
life shimmers and wells! —

Benevolent gods! how beautiful he became with his gaze upon
me! how the whole youth, grown taller by a span, stood there in easy
vigour, save that he let his loving arms hang humbly down as if they
were nothing! and how he then looked up in rapture, as if I’d soared into
heaven and were no longer there, oh! how he now smiled and blushed
in all the grace of his heart when he became aware of me again and
between the clouding tears his Phoebus eye shone through, to ask ‘is it
you? is it really you?’

And why did he meet me with such reverence, so full of loving
superstitious awe? why had he first bowed his head, why was the
divine youth so full of longing and sorrow? His genius was too blissful
to remain alone, and too poor the world to comprehend it. Oh, that
made for such a lovely image, woven of greatness and grief! But now
it’s different! the grief is gone! He’s found his work to do, he’s the sick
man no more! —

I was full of sighing when I began to write to you, my love! Now I’m
nought but joy. So does to speak of you make happy. And see! that’s
how it shall stay. Farewell!

Hyperion to Diotima [XLIII]

We’ve still found time to celebrate your feast day, lovely life! before
the tumult begins. It was a heavenly day. Sweet springtime wafted and
shone from the orient, it drew forth from us your name, just as it drew
forth the blossoms from the trees, and all the blissful secrets of love
poured out of me. A love like ours my friend had never known, and
it was delightful how the proud man became all ear, how his eye and
spirit glowed to grasp your image, your being.

‘Oh,’ he cried at last, ‘then it’s worth the effort fighting for our Greece
if it still bears plants like these!’

‘That’s right, my Alabanda,’ I said; ‘then we'll go cheerful into
battle, then heavenly fire will drive us on to deeds when our spirit is
made young again by the image of such natures, and then we won’t
be chasing after petty goals, then we won't be bothering with this
and that, tinkering with externals and ignoring the spirit, drinking
the wine for the cup’s sake; and we will not rest, Alabanda, till genial
bliss is mystery no more, till all eyes are turned into triumphal arches
from which the human spirit, so long absent, shines forth out of the
erring and the suffering, and joyful in victory greets the paternal
aether. — Ha! by the flag alone shall no one know our future people;
all must be made new, there must be fundamental change; pleasure
full of earnest and all labour full of cheer! nothing, not even the most
paltry and commonplace, without the spirit and the gods! Love and
hate and every sound from us must dumbfound the more vulgar
world and never a single moment shall remind us of the humdrum
past!’

Hyperion to Diotima [XLIV]

The volcano’s erupting. In Coron and Modon the Turks are under
siege and we're pushing onwards with our mountain folk up the
Peloponnese.

Now all melancholy’s at an end, Diotima, and my spirit is firmer and
quicker since I’ve been engaged in living labour, and see! I now even
have a daily schedule.

I begin with the sun. Then I go out to where my warrior-folk lie in
the forest shade, and greet the thousand bright eyes that now open up
before me with wild affection. An awakening army! I know nothing like
it, and all life in towns and villages is a swarm of bees by comparison.

Man cannot deny that once he was happy, like the deer of the forest,
and after untold years there still glimmers in us a yearning for the days
of the primal world when each roamed the earth like a god, before who
knows what? made man tame, and instead of walls and dead wood the
soul of the world, the all-pervasive holy air enveloped him still.

Diotima! I’m often filled with wonder when I walk amongst my
carefree folk and, as if sprung from the earth, one after another rises
and stretches towards the morning light, and among the troops of men
the crackling flame leaps up where the mother sits with the shivering
babe, where the quickening food cooks, whilst the horses, scenting the
day, snort and whinny, and the forest resounds with all-shaking war
music, and all around shimmers and rustles with weapons — but these
are words, and the special delight of such a life is beyond telling.

Then my company gathers eagerly round me, and it’s wonderful
how even the oldest and thrawnest honour me in all my youth. We’ve
come to confide in each other, and there’s many a man will tell how he’s
been treated by life, and my heart often swells at this fate or that. Then I
begin to talk of better days, and their eyes open wide and light up when
they think of the covenant that shall join us and the proud image of the
budding free state looms before them.

‘All for each and each for all!’ There’s a joyful spirit in the words, and
it always grips my men like a commandment from the gods. O Diotima!
thus to see then how with hopes the hardened nature mellows and
all its pulses beat higher and the grand designs smooth and clear the
darkened brow, to stand thus in a sphere of human beings, surrounded
by faith and joy, that’s more than beholding earth and heaven and sea
in all their glory.

Then I drill them in weapons and marching until noon. Their good
cheer makes them willing pupils, and me it makes a master. Now they
stand close-ranked in Macedonian phalanx and only move their arms,

now they fly apart like rays of light to bolder strife in separate squads
where supple force varies in every position and each man is his own
commander, and then they assemble again at a point of safety — and
always, wherever they move or stand in such a dance of weapons, there
floats before their eyes and mine the image of the slaves of tyranny and
the real battlefield.

Afterwards, when the sun shines hotter, council is held in the inner
forest, and it’s a joy to sway with quiet mind over our great future. Well
take away from chance its power, we shall master fate. We'll let resistance
come on our terms, we'll goad the enemy into action for which we’re
well prepared. Or we'll look on, seemingly daunted, and let him come
nearer till he offers his neck for the blow, we'll also confound him with
our speed and that’s my panacea. But more seasoned physicians think
nothing of such cure-alls.

How good I then feel in the evenings with my Alabanda when for
pleasure we roam the sun-red hills on sprightly steeds, and on the
peaks where we linger the breeze plays in the manes of our mounts,
and its friendly whispering mingles with our talk whilst we gaze out
into the distances of Sparta that are to be our battle prize! and when
we're returned and sit together in the lovely coolness of the night, and
the wine cup wafts its fragrance, and the moonlight shines on our frugal
meal, and in the midst of our smiling stillness the history of the ancients
rises like a cloud from the sacred soil that bears us, how blissful is it then
to grasp each other’s hands in such a moment!

Then it may be that Alabanda speaks of many another tormented by
the tedium of the age, of many a crooked path forged by life since its
direct course has been blocked, and then my Adamas also comes to mind,
with his journeyings, that longing of his which lured him into the depths
of Asia — ‘those are mere makeshifts, dear old man!’ Td like to call to him
then, ‘come! and build your world! with us! for our world is also yours.’

And your world too, Diotima, for it is a copy of you. O you, with
your Elysian stillness, could we only create what you are!

Hyperion to Diotima [XLV]

We’ve now had three successive victories in small skirmishes, but
where the fighting men crisscrossed each other like lightning and

everything was one consuming flame. Navarin is ours and now we
stand before the fortress of Mistra, the remains of ancient Sparta. The
flag I snatched from an Albanian horde I’ve planted on a ruin that lies
before the city, I’ve flung for joy my Turkish turban into the Eurotas and
have been wearing the Greek helmet ever since.

And now I’d like to see you, O maiden! Id like to see you and take
your hands and press them to my heart, for which the joy perhaps may
soon be too great! soon! in a week perhaps it will be freed, the ancient,
noble, holy Peloponnese.

O then, my dearest! teach me piety! then teach my overflowing heart
a prayer! I should stay silent, for what have I done? and even had I done
anything to speak of, yet how much still remains to do? But how can I
help it if my thought is swifter than time? I’d much rather have it the
other way round, with time and deed outflying thought, and winged
victory overtaking hope itself.

My Alabanda blossoms like a bridegroom. From his every glance the
coming world smiles out at me, and with that I can as yet just about still
my impatience.

Diotima! I wouldn’t swap this budding bliss for the finest heyday
of ancient Greece, and the smallest of our victories means more to me
than Marathon and Thermopylae and Plataea. Is it not true? Is not the
convalescing life dearer to the heart than the untouched one that is yet to
know sickness? Only when youth is gone do we love it, and only when
lost youth comes again does it then gladden all the depths of the soul.

My tent stands by the Eurotas, and when I wake after midnight the
ancient river-god murmurs reproachfully past me, and smiling I take
the flowers of the bank and strew them on his glancing waves and say
to him: “Take this as a sign, you lonely one! Soon the life of old will
blossom around you again.’

Diotima to Hyperion [XLVI]

I’ve received the letters, my Hyperion, that you wrote to me along
the way. You seize me powerfully with all that you tell me, and amidst
my love I often shudder to see the gentle youth who wept at my feet
transformed into this warlike being.

Won’t you then forget how to love?

But change as you will! I shall follow you. I think that if you could
hate me I'd even then feel like you, I’d do my best to hate you too, and so
our souls would remain akin and that’s no idle vaunt, Hyperion.

I too am wholly changed from what I used to be. I’m missing my
serene outlook on the world and my free delight in everything that
lives. It’s only the field of the stars that still attracts my eye. For that,
I dwell the more fondly on the great spirits of ancient days and how
they ended on earth, and those noble Spartan women have won my
heart. Yet I don’t forget the new warriors withal, the lusty ones whose
hour is come; often I hear their triumphal clamour, nearer and nearer to
me, roaring up through the Peloponnese, often I see them surging there
like a cataract down through the Epidaurian woods, and their weapons
glancing from afar in the sunlight that escorts them like a herald, O my
Hyperion! and you hasten across to Calauria and greet the tranquil
woods of our love, greet me and then fly back to your work; — and do
you think I fear the outcome? Dearest! there are times I’m on the point
of being overwhelmed, but my larger thoughts, like flames, hold the
frost at bay. —

Farewell! carry it through as the spirit commands you! and don’t
let the war last too long, for the sake of the peace, Hyperion, for the
sake of the beautiful, new, golden peace when, as you said, in our book
of statutes will one day be inscribed the laws of nature, and when life
itself, when divine nature, that can’t be written into any book, will be in
the heart of the community. Farewell.

Hyperion to Diotima [XLVII]

You should have soothed me, my Diotima! should have told me not
to rush, told me to wrest from fate the victory bit by bit, as one does
from tight debtors their dues. O maiden! standing still is worst of all. My
blood dries up in my veins, so do I thirst to advance, and have to stand
here idle, have to besiege and besiege day in and day out. Our people
want to storm, but that would inflame their restive spirits beyond all
temperance, and then woe to our hopes if the savage being seethes up
and bursts the bonds of discipline and love.

I don’t know, it can only be a matter of days before Mistra must
surrender, but I wish we were further forward. Here in the camp it’s

like being in storm-laden air. I’m impatient, and I’m not happy with my
men. There’s a frightening wantonness amongst them.

But I’m silly to make so much of my mood. And it’s surely worth
enduring a worry or two for ancient Lacedaemon before it’s won.

Hyperion to Diotima [XLVIII]

It’s over, Diotima! our people have plundered, murdered without
distinction, even our brothers are slain, the Greeks in Mistra, the
innocent, or they wander about helpless and the lifeless anguish on their
faces cries out to heaven and earth for vengeance against the barbarians
at whose head I stood.

Now I can go forth and preach my good cause. Oh, now all hearts
will fly to me!

But I went about it cleverly, didn’t I? I knew my people. Indeed! it
was an extraordinary undertaking, to plant my Elysium with a band of
brigands.

No! by holy Nemesis! I got what I deserved and I will bear it too,
bear it till the pain tears my final consciousness asunder.

Do you think I’m raving? I have an honourable wound, dealt me
by one of my faithful followers whilst I tried to avert the atrocity. If I
were raving I’d rip the bandage from it, and then my blood would flow
whither it belongs, into this grieving earth.

This grieving earth! this naked earth! that I sought to clothe with
sacred groves, that I sought to adorn with all the flowers of Greek life!

Oh, it would have been beautiful, my Diotima.

Do you call me disheartened? Dear maiden! there’s too much
calamity. Demented hordes burst in on all sides; rapine rages in Morea
like a plague and anyone who doesn’t himself seize the sword is put
to flight, butchered, and yet the maniacs claim they’re fighting for our
freedom. Others from amongst the raw people are in the pay of the
Sultan and they behave just the same.

I’ve just heard that our inglorious army is now scattered. At Tripolitsa
the cowards met an Albanian troop that numbered half as many. But
since there was nothing to plunder, the wretches all ran away. The
Russians who'd ventured on the campaign with us, forty brave men,
were the only ones to stand their ground, and all found their deaths.

And so now I’m alone again with my Alabanda, as before. Since
he saw me fall and bleed in Mistra this faithful friend has forgotten
all else, his hopes, his lust of victory, his despair. The man of wrath
who plunged amongst the plunderers like an avenging god, he now so
gently guided me out of the turmoil and my clothing was wet with his
tears. He’s stayed with me too in the hut where I’ve since lain, and I’m
now the more pleased about that. For had he gone on with the others,
he’d now be lying in the dust at Tripolitsa.

How things will go from now on, I don’t know. Fate thrusts me out
into confusion and that’s what I deserve; I’m banished from you by my
own shame, and who knows for how long?

Oh! I promised you a Greece and now you get a dirge instead. Be
your own comfort!

Hyperion to Diotima [XLIX]

I can barely bring myself to speak.

We delight in speech, to be sure, we chatter away like the birds so
long as the world wafts over us like a May breeze; but between noon
and evening things can change, and what is lost in the end?

Believe me, and mind that I say this to you from my deepest soul:
language is a great superfluity. The best is ever for itself and rests in
its depths like the pearl at the bottom of the sea. — But what I really
wanted to write to you, since the painting must have its frame and man
his daily task, I intend to take service for a while with the Russian fleet;
for I want nothing more to do with the Greeks.

O dear girl! it’s grown very dark around me!

Hyperion to Diotima [L]

I’ve lingered, I’ve struggled. But finally it has to be.

I see what needs to happen, and because I see it, it shall come to pass.
Do not mistake my meaning! do not condemn me! I must advise you to
leave me, my Diotima.

I can be for you nothing more, you lovely being! This heart has run
dry, and my eyes see living life no more. Oh, my lips are withered; the
sweet breath of love wells up in my bosom no more.

A single day has robbed me of all youth; by the Eurotas my life
has wept itself weary, oh! by the Eurotas that in irredeemable shame
wails with all its waves past Lacedaemon’s rubble. It’s there, there I was
mown down by fate. — Am I to possess your love like alms? — I’m so
utterly nothing, as unrenowned as the meanest menial. I’m shunned,
cursed like a common rebel, and many a Greek in Morea will henceforth
recount our heroic deeds to his children’s children as a tale of thieves.

Oh! and one thing I’ve long kept from you. My father solemnly
disowned me, banished me beyond recall from the house of my youth,
never wants to see me again, either in this life or the next, as he puts it.
This was his response to the letter in which I told him of my undertaking.

But don’t ever let yourself be led astray by pity. Believe me, there’s
a joy that still remains for us throughout. True pain inspires. Whoever
mounts his misery stands higher. And what’s glorious is that only in
suffering do we fully feel the freedom of the soul. Freedom! understand
the word who can — it’s a profound word, Diotima. I’m so deeply
beleaguered, so incredibly hurt, I’m without hope, without a goal,
I’m utterly bereft of honour, and yet there’s a power within me, an
indomitable something that sends sweet shudders through my bones
whenever it stirs in me.

And I still have my Alabanda. He has as little to gain as I do. Him
I can keep for myself without harm! Oh! the kingly youth would have
deserved a better lot. He’s become so gentle and so still. That often
nearly rends my heart. But each of us sustains the other. We say nothing
to each other; what should we say? But for all that there’s a blessing in
many a little labour of love we perform for one another.

There he sleeps and smiles contentedly, inthe midst of our misfortune.
The good soul! he doesn’t know what I’m doing. He wouldn’t suffer it.
‘You must write to Diotima,’ he charged me, ‘and must tell her to make
ready soon to flee with you to a more liveable land.’ But he doesn’t
know that a heart that’s learned despair, such as his and mine, can be
nothing more for the beloved. No! no! you could never ever find peace
with Hyperion, you would have to become unfaithful, and that I will
spare you.

And so farewell then, you sweet girl! farewell! I’d like to tell you, ‘go
hither, go thither; there the springs of life purl forth.’ I’d like to point
you to a freer land, a land full of beauty and full of soul, and say: ‘Escape

thither!’ But oh heaven! if I could do that, then I’d also be another and
so there’d be no need for me to part from you — part? Alas! I know not
what I do. I weened myself so calm, so cool. Now my head reels and my
heart flings itself about like a restless patient. Woe on me! I destroy my
last joy. But it has to be and nature’s ‘Alas!’ avails nothing here. I owe
this to you, and besides I was born to be homeless and have no resting
place. O earth! O you stars! shall I find nowhere to dwell in the end?

Just one more time I should like to return to your bosom, no matter
where! Aether eyes! one more time in you to meet myself! to hang upon
your lips, you lovely! you ineffable one! to drink in your rapturous,
holy-sweet life — but don’t listen to that! I beseech you, pay no heed to
that! I’d say I was a seducer, if you were to listen to it. You know me, you
understand me. You know how deeply you heed me by not pitying me,
by not listening to me.

I can, I may no more — how can the priest go on living if his god is
no more? O genius of my people! O soul of Greece! down I must go, in
the realm of the dead I must seek you.

Hyperion to Diotima [LI]

I’ve waited long, Ill confess to you, I’ve been hoping longingly for a
word of farewell from your heart, but you remain silent. That too is the
language of your beautiful soul, Diotima.

Yet it’s true, is it not, this doesn’t mean the holier chords must cease?
it’s true, is it not, Diotima, though the gentle moonlight of love may
sink, the higher stars in its heaven still continue to shine? Oh, this is
my final joy, that we remain inseparable, though no sound more return
from you to me, no shadow of our lovely days of youth!

I look out into the sunset sea, I stretch out my arms towards the airt
where you live, far away, and my soul warms once more with all the
joys of love and youth.

O earth! my cradle! all bliss and all pain is in the leave we take of
you.

You dear Ionian islands! and you, my Calauria, and you my Tinos,
your'e all before my eye, distant as you are, and my spirit flits with the
breezes over the lively waters; and you that there shimmer dimly to
one side, you shores of Teos and Ephesus where once I walked with

Alabanda in the days of hope, you shine again for me as then, and I’d
like to sail across to the land and kiss the soil and warm the soil at my
bosom, and stammer all the sweet words of parting to the silent earth
before I fly up into freedom.

Pity, pity, that things don’t go better now amongst men, else I’d
gladly remain on this good star. But I can do without this earthly orb,
and that’s worth more than all that it can give.

‘Let us, O child! suffer slavery in the sunlight,’ said the mother to
Polyxena, and her love of life could not have spoken more beautifully.
But the sunlight it is that deters me from slavery, it won’t let me stay
on this degraded earth and, like paths leading home, the hallowed rays
draw me on.

For long the majesty of the fateless soul has been more present to
me than all else; I’ve often lived within myself in glorious solitude; I’ve
grown used to shaking off all outward things like flakes of snow; how
should I then be feared to seek out so-called death? have I not freed
myself a thousand times in thought, how should I then hold back from
really doing it for once? Are we then like serfs, fettered to the soil we
plough? are we like tame fowl that durstn’t run out of the farmyard
because that’s where they’re fed?

We're like the young eagles the father drives from the nest, that they
may search for their prey in the high aether.

Tomorrow our fleet goes into combat and this one will be hot enough.
I look on the battle as a bath to wash the dust off me; and I expect to find
what I wish for; wishes like mine are readily granted on the spot. And
so I would end after all by achieving something through my campaign,
and see that amongst men no effort goes to waste.

‘Pious soul!’ Td like to say, ‘think of me when you come to my grave.’
But they'll probably cast me into the surging sea, and I’m happy to see
my remains sink down where the sources all and the streams that I loved
gather together, and where the storm-cloud rises up and waters the hills
and the valleys that I loved. And we? O Diotima! Diotima! when shall
we see one another again?

It’s impossible, and my innermost life rebels at the thought that we
could lose each other. I would wander the stars for millennia, clothe
myself in all forms, in all of life’s languages just to meet you once more.
But I believe that like will soon find like.

Great soul! you'll be able to accept this parting, and so let me wander!
Greet your mother! Greet Notara and the other friends!

Also greet the trees where I first met you, and the merry rivulets
where we walked, and the lovely gardens of Angele, and let my image
meet you when you do, my love! Farewell.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LII]

I was in a lovely dream when I copied out for you the letters that I
once exchanged. Now I write to you again, my Bellarmin! and take you
further down, down to the deepest depths of my sorrows, and then, last
of my loved ones! come forth with me to the place where a new day
shines upon us.

The battle I’d written about to Diotima began. The ships of the Turks
had taken refuge in the channel between the island of Chios and the
Asian coast, and stood along the mainland off Chesma. My admiral left
the line with his ship, the one I was on, and began the prelude with
the first ship of the Turks. At the very first attack the raging pair were
heated to a frenzy, it was a terrible revenge-sodden turmoil. The ships
were soon bound fast together with their cordage; the furious fighting
grew ever tighter and tighter.

A deep feeling of life coursed through me once more. I felt warm
and well in every limb. Like one tenderly departing, my spirit felt itself
for the last time in all its senses. And now, full of hot resentment that I
knew no better way than to let myself be slaughtered among a throng
of barbarians, and with tears of rage in my eyes, I stormed to where my
death was certain.

I found the foe close enough to hand and, of the Russians who fought
at my side, in a matter of moments not even one remained. I stood there
alone, full of pride, and cast my life like a beggar’s penny before the
barbarians, but they didn’t want me. They looked on me as someone
whom one fears to sin against, and fate seemed to reverence me in my
despair.

In sheer self-defence one of them at last laid into me and struck me
so that I fell. From then on I was aware of nothing more until I came to
again on Paros, whither I’d been shipped.

From the servant who carried me out of the battle I afterwards heard
that the two ships that began the combat had blown up only moments
after he’d taken me off in a skiff with the surgeon. The Russians had
hurled fire into the Turkish ship, and because their own was entangled
with it, both went up together.

How this terrible battle ended you will know. ‘So does one poison
purge the other,’ I cried, when I heard that the Russians had burned the
entire Turkish fleet — ‘so do tyrants wipe each other out.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LIII]

For six days after the battle I lay in a tortured death-like sleep. My
life was like a night, punctuated by pain as by lancing lightning. The
first thing I recognized was Alabanda. He had, as I heard, not left my
side for an instant, he’d cared for me almost alone, with unbelievable
solicitude, with a thousand tender homely attentions that would never
in his life have occurred to him otherwise, and he’d been heard on his
knees before my bed, crying: ‘O live, dear friend! that I may live!’

It was a happy awakening, Bellarmin! when my eye now opened
again to the light, and with tears of reunion this glorious man stood
before me.

I reached out my hand to him and, proud as he was, he kissed it
with all the rapture of love. ‘He lives,’ he cried, ‘O nature! you kindly
all-healing saviour! you at least don’t forsake your wretched pair, these
errants without a fatherland! Oh, I'll never forget, Hyperion! how your
ship went up in fire before my eyes and thundering swept up the sailors
with it into the raging flames, and amongst those few to be saved there
was no Hyperion. I was out of my senses, and the furious clamour of
battle did nothing to calm me. Yet I soon got word of you, and flew after
you as soon as we were altogether finished with the foe.’ —

And how he now watched over me! how with loving care he held me
captive in the magic circle of his favours! how without a word he taught
me through his great calmness to understand without rancour and like
aman the free course of the world!

O you sons of the sun! you freer souls! much has been lost in this
Alabanda. I’ve sought, and besought life in vain since he went away;
such a truly Roman nature I never found again. Carefree, deeply wise,
courageous, noble! Where is there a man if he was not one? And when
he was mild and meek, it was as when the evening light plays in the
gloom of the majestic oak and its leaves drip from the storm of the day.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LIV]

It was in the beautiful days of autumn when, half-recovered from
my wound, I went to the window again for the first time. I returned to
life with calmer senses and my soul had become more attentive. With its
gentlest magic heaven breathed upon me, and mild as a rain of blossom
the bright sunbeams streamed down. There was a great, still, tender
spirit in the season, and the peace of fulfilment, the bliss of ripeness
in the murmuring boughs, enfolded me like the renewed youth the
ancients hoped for in their Elysium.

I'd long not enjoyed it with pure soul, this childlike life of the world;
now my eyes opened up with all the joy of seeing anew, and blissful
nature had remained changeless in her beauty. My tears flowed before
her as an offering of atonement, and a fresh heart rose shuddering
from my former discontent. ‘O sacred plant world!’ I cried, ‘we strive
and we scheme, and yet we have you! we struggle with our mortal
powers to build the beautiful, and yet it grows up effortless beside us!
it’s true, is it not, Alabanda? man is made to care for bare necessity,
everything else looks after itself. And yet — I cannot forget how much
more I wanted.’

‘Be happy, dear friend! that you are,’ cried Alabanda, ‘and no longer
let your quiet working be hampered by grief.’

‘And I will rest too,’ I said. ‘Oh, all the designs, all the demands I
will rip up like letters of debt. I will keep myself pure as an artist does;
you will I love, innocent life, life of the groves and the springs! you
will I honour, O sunlight! on you will I still myself, beautiful aether,
you that inspirit the stars and here too breathe around these trees and
here stir us deep within our breast! O wilfulness of men! like a beggar I
bowed my neck and the silent gods of nature gazed at me with all their
gifts! — You're smiling, Alabanda? Oh, how often in our early days

together did you smile that way when your boy prattled away before
you in the drunken exuberance of youth, whilst you stood there like
a silent temple pillar, amid the rubble of the world, and had to suffer
the wild tendrils of my love to wind around you — look! it’s like a
blindfold falling from my eyes and the golden days of old come to life
again.”

‘Ah!’ he cried, ‘this earnestness in which we lived and this lust for
life!’

‘When we hunted in the forest,’ I cried, ‘when we bathed in the
surging sea, when we sang and we drank where the sun and the wine
and eyes and lips sparkled through the shade of the laurel — it was a
life beyond compare, and our spirit illumed like a shining heaven our
youthful happiness.’ ‘And that is why neither can forsake the other,’
said Alabanda.

‘Oh, I have a grave confession to make to you,’ I said. ‘Will you
believe me when I say I wanted away? from you! that I violently sought
my death! was that not heartless? madness? ah, and my Diotima! she
should leave me, I wrote to her, and then another letter, on the eve of
the battle —’ ‘and there you wrote to her,’ he cried, ‘that in the battle
you hoped to find your end? O Hyperion! But she may well not yet have
received your last letter. You just have to make haste and write to her
that you're alive.’

‘Dearest Alabanda!’ I cried, ‘that is solace! I’ll write at once and
dispatch my servant with the letter. Oh, I will offer him all I have to
rush and reach Calauria in time. —’

‘And the other letter, in which you spoke of renouncing her, the good
soul will understand and readily forgive,’ he added.

‘She'll forgive?’ I cried; ‘O all you hopes! yes! if I could still be happy
with the angel!’

‘You will still be happy,’ cried Alabanda; ‘you still have left the most
beautiful of life’s seasons. The youth is a hero, the man a god if he can
live to see it.’

There was a wondrous dawning in my soul as he spoke.

The tree tops softly shuddered; like flowers from the dark earth, stars
sprang forth from the womb of the night and heaven’s spring sparkled
on me in holy joy.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LV]

A few moments later, just as I was about to write to Diotima,
Alabanda came back gleefully into the room. ‘A letter, Hyperion,’ he
cried; I startled and flew across.

‘How long,’ wrote Diotima, ‘had I to live without a sign from you!
You wrote to me about the fateful day at Mistra and I responded swiftly;
yet it seems you never received my letter. Soon afterwards you wrote
to me again, briefly and gloomily, and told me you were minded to
join the Russian fleet; again I replied; but you didn’t receive that letter
either; then it was my turn to wait in vain, from May till now, the end
of summer, until a few days ago the letter came, telling me I should
renounce you, my love!

‘You counted on me, had faith enough in me to know this letter
couldn’t offend me. That gave me heartfelt joy in the midst of my grief.

‘Unhappy sublime spirit! I’ve understood you only too well. Oh, it’s so
wholly natural that you no longer want to love, since your greater wishes
languish. For must you not spurn food when you're dying of thirst?

‘I soon came to know that I couldn’t be everything to you. Could
I loosen the bonds of mortality for you? could I still the flame in your
breast for which no fountain flows and no vine grows? could Ihand you
the joys of a world in a chalice?

‘That’s what you want. That’s what you need, and you can do no
other. The boundless impotence of your fellow-men has robbed you of
your life.

‘He who, like you, has suffered hurt in his whole soul can
no longer rest in solitary joy, he who, like you, has suffered
shallow nothingness quickens only in the highest spirit, he who
has suffered death, like you, heals among the gods alone.

‘Happy all those who do not understand you! He who understands
you must share your greatness and your despair.

‘I found you as you are. Life’s first curiosity drove me to that
wondrous being. Ineffably the tender soul drew me on, and childishly
fearless I played about your dangerous flame. — The beautiful joys
of our love appeased you; but only, wicked man! to make you more
savage. They soothed, they solaced me too, they made me forget you
were fundamentally beyond solace, and that I wasn’t far from becoming
so myself, ever since I’d looked into your beloved heart.

‘In Athens, among the ruins of the Olympieion, it seized me anew.
I might well still have thought in a carefree hour that the grief of the
youth could not really be so earnest and unrelenting. It’s so rare that
with his first step into life a man has felt so all at once, so minutely, so
quickly, so deeply the whole fate of his age, and that it inheres indelibly
within him, this feeling, because he isn’t rough enough to drive it out
and not weak enough to weep it away; that, my dearest! is so rare that
we deem it almost unnatural.

‘Now, amidst the rubble of bright Athens, now it came home to me
all too painfully how the tables are turned, that now it’s the dead who
walk above the earth and the quick, the divine men, who are below,
now I also saw it too plainly and palpably written on your face, now
once and for all I conceded you were right. But at the same time you
appeared greater to me too. A being full of hidden power, full of deep,
undeveloped meaning, a youth uniquely promising, so you seemed to
me. He to whom fate speaks so loud is entitled to speak still louder
back to fate, I told myself; the more unfathomably he suffers, the more
unfathomably powerful he is. From you, from you alone I hoped
for all healing. I saw you travelling. I saw you working. Oh, what a
transformation! Founded by you, the grove of Academe greened again
above the listening pupils, and the plane tree of Ilissus again heard holy
discourse as of old.

‘In your school the genius of our youth soon gained the earnestness
of the ancients and its ephemeral games grew more immortal, for it
became ashamed, holding butterfly flight to be imprisonment. —

‘This one might have been content to steer a steed; now he’s general.
His whole pleasure another might have found in warbling an idle ditty;
now he’s an artist. For you'd laid bare before them in open combat the
energies of the heroes, the energies of the world; you’d given them
the riddles of your heart to solve; and so the youths learned to bring
together what is great, learned to understand nature’s play, full of soul,
and put aside frivolity. — Hyperion! Hyperion! have you not made me,
the mute maiden, into a muse? So it went with the others too.

‘Oh! now these congenial men didn’t leave one another so lightly;
no longer did they drift aimlessly amongst one another like sand in the
storm of the desert, nor did youth and age scorn each other, nor the
stranger want a welcoming host, and fellow countrymen never more

hived themselves off and lovers never more wearied of each other; from
your springs, nature, they refreshed themselves, oh! with the holy joys
that well up mysteriously from your depths and renew the spirit; and
the gods quickened again the withering souls of men; every bond of
friendship amongst them was guarded by the heart-sustaining gods.
For you, Hyperion! had healed the eyes of your Greeks, that they could
see living life; and the inspiration sleeping amongst them like fire in
wood had been kindled by you, that they could feel the still and steady
inspiration of nature and its pure children. Oh! now men no longer took
the beautiful world like laymen the artist’s poem when they praise the
words and note the utility. A magical model you became for the Greeks,
living nature! and kindled by the bliss of the ever-youthful gods, all
man’s doings were a festival as of old; and to their deeds the young
heroes were escorted by Helios’ light, more beautiful than any martial
music.

‘Hush! hush! It was my most beautiful dream, my first and my last.
You’re too proud to busy yourself further with this knavish race. And
you're quite right in that. You led them to freedom and they thought of
pillage. You lead them victorious into their ancient Lacedaemon and
these monsters plunder, and by your own father you're cursed, great
son! and no wilderness, no cave is safe enough for you on this Greek
soil that you’ve reverenced like holy ground, that you’ve loved more
than me.

‘O my Hyperion! I’m the gentle maid no more since I’ve known all
this. Outrage drives me upwards, that I can barely look to earth and my
hurt heart won’t stop trembling.

‘We must part. You're right. Besides, I don’t want any children; for I
grudge them to the world of slaves, and in this drouth the poor plants
would wither away before my eyes.

‘Farewell! you dear youth! go where it seems to you worth the effort
to offer up your soul. The world must have one battlefield, one place of
sacrifice where you can find release. It would be a pity if so the good
energies all passed away like a dream. But however you find your end,
you'll return to the gods, return to the holy, free, youthful life of nature
whence you came, and that is all you long for and I too.’

So she wrote to me. I was shaken to the marrow, full of fear and joy,
yet I sought to compose myself and find words for a reply.

‘You consent, Diotima?’ I wrote, ‘you think my renunciation right?
you could comprehend it? — Faithful soul! you could reconcile yourself
to that? Even to my darkest erring you could reconcile yourself, heavenly
patience! and surrendered yourself, gloomed yourself for love, happy
child of nature! and became like me and sanctified by sharing it my
grief? Beautiful heroine! what crown have you not earned?

‘But let there now be an end to grieving, my love! You’ve followed
me into my night, now come! and let me follow you into your light, to
your grace let us return, beautiful heart! oh, your tranquillity let me see
again, blissful nature! and for ever let my hubris pass away before the
image of your peace.

‘It’s true, isn’t it, dearest! that it’s not yet too late for my return, and
you'll take me back and can love me again as before? it’s true, isn’t it,
that the happiness of past days is not yet lost to us?

‘I’ve taken it all to extremes. I’ve acted the ingrate towards my
motherly earth, flinging away like a serf’s pittance my blood and all the
loving gifts she gave me, and oh! a thousand times more of an ingrate
towards you, holy maiden! who once received me into her peace, me, a
feral, fractured being, from whose deeply oppressed breast stole hardly
a glimmer of youth, like the odd blade of grass on bare-trodden paths.
Had you not called me into life? was Inot yours? how could I then — oh,
you don’t yet know, I hope, haven’t yet in your hands the unhappy
letter I wrote to you before the last battle? I wanted to die then, Diotima,
and imagined I was doing holy work. But how can that be holy which
pulls lovers apart? how can that be holy which ruptures our life’s pious
happiness? — Diotima! life born of beauty! for that I’ve now become the
more similar to you in what is uniquely yours, I’ve finally learned to
reverence, I’ve learned to preserve what’s good and essential on earth.
Oh, even if I could land up there in the radiant islands of heaven, would
I find more than I do with Diotima?

‘Hear me now, beloved!

‘In Greece I can remain no longer. That you know. When he cast
me off my father sent me from his surplus funds enough for us to flee
into some holy vale of the Alps or Pyrenees, and there to buy a couthie
cottage and enough green earth to meet the needs of life’s golden mean.

‘If you’re willing, then I'll come at once and lead you and your mother
on my faithful arm, and we'll kiss Calauria’s shores and dry away our

tears, and hasten across the Isthmus to the Adriatic Sea whence a safe
ship shall carry us onwards.

‘Oh, come! in the depths of the mountain world the secret of our
hearts shall rest like the precious stone in the mine, in the womb of the
heaven-soaring forests we'll feel ourselves as amidst the pillars of the
innermost temple where the godless dare not near, and we'll sit by the
source, contemplating our world in its mirror, heaven and house and
garden and us. Often on bright nights we'll stroll in the shade of our
fruit trees and listen for the god in us, the loving one, while the plant
from midday slumber raises its sunken head and the gentle life of your
flowers quickens when they bathe their tender arms in the dew and the
night breeze breathes coolingly around them, infusing them, and over
us blossoms the meadow of heaven with all its sparkling flowers, and to
the side behind westering clouds, as if out of love, shyly the moonlight
mimics the sun-youth’s setting — and then in the mornings when, like
a river-bed, our valley fills with warm light and the golden flood runs
tranquilly through our trees and flows around our house, enhancing
the loveliness of the rooms, your creation, and you walk in the sunlit
radiance and in your grace you sanctify the day for me, my love! when
then, as we thus celebrate the bliss of morning, the bustling life of the
earth kindles before our eyes like a sacrificial fire, and we go forth on
our daily tasks to cast them too, as a part of us too, into the rising flame,
will you not then say that we’re happy, that we’re become again like the
ancient priests of nature, holy and joyful, those who were pious ere ever
a temple stood.

‘Have I said enough? decide now my fate, dear maiden, and
soon! — It’s as well that I’m still half an invalid from the last battle,
and that I’ve yet to be released from service; else I couldn’t stay here,
I'd need to be off to ask you in person, and that wouldn’t be good, that
would be to besiege you. —

‘O Diotima! foolish qualms strike me at the heart, and yet — I can’t
thole the thought that this hope too shall founder.

‘Are you not grown too great to return to the happiness of earth? The
fierce flame of the spirit, kindled by your sorrow, will it not consume
everything mortal in you?

‘T know full well that he who lightly falls out with the world more
lightly makes peace with it too. But you, with your childlike stillness,

you so happy once in your high humility, Diotima! who will appease
you when fate arouses you?

‘Dear life! is there no more healing power for you in me? of all the
sounds from the heart is there none to call you back again to human life
where you once so lovingly lingered in low flight? oh come, oh remain
in this twilight! This shadowland is the element of love, and only here
does the still dew of sadness run from the heaven of your eyes.

‘And do you mind our golden days no more? those lovely, divinely
melodious days? do they not whisper to you from all the groves of
Calauria?

‘And look! there’s so much has perished in me, and I no longer have
many hopes. Your image with its heavenly disposition I managed still
to rescue like a house-god from the flames. Our life, ours, is still intact
in me. Should I now go and bury this too? Shall I go forth, restless and
without a goal, from one alien land to another? Is it for this I learned to
love?

‘Oh no! you first and you last! Mine you were and mine you will
stay.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LVI]

I was sitting with Alabanda on a nearby hill, in pleasantly warming
sun, and around us played the wind with the fallen leaves. The land
lay still; only here and there from the forest there came the sound of a
toppling tree, felled by the landman, and beside us the ephemeral rain-
stream murmuring down to the tranquil sea.

I was as good as free of worry; I hoped now soon to see my Diotima,
soon to live with her in quiet happiness. Alabanda had talked me out
of all my doubts; so sure was he himself about it. He too was blithe;
but in another sense. The future had no power over him any more.
Oh, I didn’t know it; he was at the end of his joys; with all his claims
on the world, with all his conquering nature, he saw himself useless,
ineffectual and isolated, and took it just as if he’d played some trivial
game and lost.

A messenger now approached us. He brought us the discharge from
war service that we’d both requested from the Russian fleet, since for us
there was nothing more to do that seemed worth the effort. I could now

leave Paros when I pleased. And I was now fit enough to travel. I didn’t
want to wait for Diotima’s answer, I wanted away, to her; it was as if
a god propelled me to Calauria. When Alabanda heard this his colour
changed, and he looked at me in sadness. ‘Is it so easy for my Hyperion,’
he cried, ‘to leave his Alabanda?’

‘Leave,’ I said, ‘how so?’

‘Oh, you dreamers!’ he cried, ‘can’t you see that we must part?”

‘How should I see it?’ I replied; ‘you never speak of it; and if now and
then I noticed anything about you that might have hinted at a parting, I
took it readily for whimsy, abundance of the heart —’

‘Oh, I know it well,’ he cried, ‘this divine game of affluent love that
creates want for itself so as to unburden itself of its own fullness, and I
would it were so with me, good Hyperion! but this is meant in earnest!’

‘In earnest?’ I cried, ‘and why then?’

‘Because, my Hyperion,’ he said gently, ‘I wouldn’t wish to disturb
your future happiness, that’s why; because I must fear Diotima’s
nearness. Believe me, it’s a parlous thing to live around lovers, and a
deedless heart, such as mine now is, will hardly be able to bear it.’

‘O good Alabanda!’ I said with a smile, ‘how you mistake yourself!
You're not made of wax, and your steadfast soul won’t so lightly leap
beyond its bounds. For the first time in your life you’re being capricious.
You played the sick-nurse here for me, and one sees how little you're
made for the part. Sitting still has made you skittish —’

‘You see,’ he said, ‘that’s just the point. Shall I be any more active
living with the two of you? and if it were any other woman! but this
Diotima! can I do otherwise? can I feel her with half my soul? she who’s
through and through so wholly one, one single divinely undivided
life? Believe me, it’s childish folly to seek to see this being without love.
You're staring at me as if you didn’t know me? Well, I’ve become alien
to myself these past few days, ever since her being came so alive in me.’

‘Oh, why can’t I give her to you?’ I cried.

‘Stop it!’ he said. ‘Don’t try to comfort me, for here there can be no
comfort. I’m alone, alone, and my life’s running out like an hourglass.’

‘Great soul!’ I cried, ‘must it come to this with you?’

‘Put your mind at rest!’ he said. ‘I was already beginning to wither
when we found each other in Smyrna. Yes! when I was still a ship’s
boy, and my spirit and all my limbs became quick and strong on rude

fare and brave toil! when in the clear air after a stormy night I’d cling
to the top of the mast, beneath the fluttering flag, and gaze out after
the seabirds across the shining deep, when in battle our wrathful ships
often churned up the sea like the boar’s tusk the earth, and I’d stand
bright-eyed by my captain’s side — then I was alive, oh, then I was alive!
And long afterwards, when the young Tiniot crossed my path on the
Smyrna shore, with his earnestness, his love, and my hardened soul
thawed again under the glances of the youth and learned to love and
hold holy all that’s too good to be governed, when with him I began a
new life, and there burgeoned within me new and more soulful energies
for enjoying and battling the world, then I hoped again — oh! and all
that I hoped and had was chained to you; I pulled you to me, tried to
drag you forcibly into my fate, lost you, found you again, our friendship
alone was my world, my worth, my fame; now that too is over, for ever,
and my whole existence is in vain.’

‘Is that really true?’ I replied with a sigh.

‘True as the sun,’ he cried, ‘but never you mind! it’s all taken care of.’

‘How so, my Alabanda?’ I said.

‘Let me tell you,’ he said. ‘There’s something I’ve never fully spoken
to you about. And then — it will calm you and me a little too, if we
speak about the past.

‘T was once walking helpless by the harbour of Trieste. The privateer I
used to serve on had foundered some years before, and together with a few
others I'd barely been able to save myself, washing ashore at Seville. My
captain had drowned, and my life and my sopping clothes were all I had
left. I undressed and rested in the sun, drying my clothes on the bushes.
Then I walked on along the road towards the town. Before I’d reached the
gates Isaw a merry company in the gardens, went in and sang a cheerful
Greek ditty. I didn’t know a sad one. It made me burn with shame and
pain, displaying my misfortune in this way. I was an eighteen-year-old
lad, wild and proud, and hated like death to be the object of people’s
attention. “Forgive me,” I said, when I was done with my song; “I’ve just
been shipwrecked and for the moment can’t think of anything better to
do for the world than sing.” I’d said this in Spanish as best I could. A man
with a distinguished face came up to me, gave me money, and said in
our tongue with a smile: “Here! use that to buy yourself a whetstone and
learn to sharpen knives, and make your wandering way on solid earth.”
The advice pleased me. “Sir! that’s indeed what I'll do,” I replied. Having

also been generously rewarded by the others, I went and did as the man
had advised, and for some time roved about Spain and France.

‘What I experienced during this time, how on the thousandfold
forms of bondage my love of liberty honed itself, and how from the
many hardships my mettle and my shrewdness grew, I’ve often relished
telling you.

‘I pursued my innocent wandering work with pleasure, but in the
end it became soured for me.

‘People took it for a mask, because I can’t have looked suitably vulgar;
they imagined I was covertly engaged in some dangerous activity, and I
was in fact arrested twice. That induced me then to give it up, and with
what little money I’d earned I set out on the journey back to the home
from which I’d once run away. I’d got as far as Trieste, and was about
to move on, down through Dalmatia. Then the rigours of travel caused
a sickness that laid me low, and with that my little wealth was all used
up. And so, half recovered, I came to be walking sadly by the harbour of
Trieste. Suddenly there stood before me the man who'd once helped me
out when I was cast ashore at Seville. He was peculiarly glad to see me
again, told me he often thought of me and asked me how I’d fared the
while. I told him everything. “I see,” he cried, “that it wasn’t in vain to
send you for a little to the school of fate. You’ve learned to endure, now
if you wish you shall act.”

‘The words, his tone, the clasp of his hand, his mien, his glance — with
the force of a god all this struck my being, made now more flammable
than ever by much suffering, and I gave myself up to it.

‘The man I’m speaking about, Hyperion, was one of those you saw
with me in Smyrna. The very next night he inducted me into a solemn
society. A shudder ran through me when I stepped into the hall and,
as I entered, my companion pointed to the grave men and said: “this
is the League of Nemesis.” Drunk with the grand sphere of action that
opened up before me, I solemnly made over my blood and my soul to
these men. Soon afterwards the gathering was adjourned, to be resumed
years later elsewhere, and each of us set out on the allotted path he was
to take through the world. I was assigned to those you found with me in
Smyrna some years after.

‘The constraint under which I lived often tormented me, I saw
precious little of the grand actions of the League, and my lust for deeds
found scant nourishment. Yet none of this sufficed to make me fall away.

It was my passion for you that finally seduced me. I’ve often told you, I
was as if without air and sun when you were gone; and I had no other
choice; I had to give up either you or my League. What I chose you see.

‘But all of the works of men have in the end their punishment, and
it’s only gods and children whom Nemesis doesn’t strike.

‘I preferred the divine right of the heart. For the sake of my darling I
broke my oath. Was that not right? must not the noblest longing be the
freest? — My heart has taken me at my word; I gave it freedom and, as
you see, it’s putting it to use.

‘Pay homage to the genius but once, and he'll heed no mortal
hindrance any more and tear in two all life’s bonds for you.

‘Obligation I broke for the sake of the friend, friendship I would
break for the sake of love. For Diotima’s sake I would betray you, and in
the end murder myself and Diotima because we should still not be one.
But that’s not the way it’s going to be; if I’m to atone for what I did, then
I will do it with freedom; I shall choose my own judges; those whom
I’ve failed shall have me.’

‘You mean your brothers of the League?’ I cried; ‘O my Alabanda!
don’t!’

‘What can they take from me but my blood?’ he replied. Then he
gently grasped my hand. ‘Hyperion!’ he cried, ‘my time is up, and all
that’s left for me is a noble end. Leave me be! Don’t belittle me, put
faith in my word! I know as well as you do that I could still fabricate
an existence for myself, could, since the banquet of life is all consumed,
still play with the crumbs, but that’s not my way; nor is it yours. Need
I say more? Do I not speak from your soul? I thirst for air, for a cooling
breeze, Hyperion! My soul wells over of itself and will no longer be
held in the old circle. Soon the beautiful winter days will come when
the dark earth is nothing more than the foil to shining heaven; then
would be a good time, then the islands of light more liberally sparkle
besides! — you wonder at my words? Dearest! those taking leave of life
all speak like drunken men and like to put on a festive manner. When
the tree begins to wither, don’t its leaves all wear the red hues of dawn?’

‘Great soul,’ I cried, ‘must I bear pity for you?’

By his exaltation I could feel the depth of his suffering. Never in
my life had I known such woe. And yet, O Bellarmin! yet I also felt the
greatness of all joys, having such an image of divinity in my eyes and

arms. ‘Yes! die then,’ I cried, ‘die! your heart is glorious enough, your
life is ripe as grapes on an autumn day. Go, you consummate one! I
would go with you, were there no Diotima.’

‘Do I have you now?’ replied Alabanda, ‘do you speak this way?
How deep, how soulful all becomes, once my Hyperion grasps it!’

‘He’s flattering me,’ I cried, ‘trying to coax from me a second time
my ill-considered word! good gods! and gain my permission for the trip
to the blood-tribunal!’

‘I'm not flattering you,’ he replied in earnest, ‘I’ve a right to do what
you would hinder, and it’s no mean one! honour that!’

There was a fire in his eyes that struck me down like a god’s
command, and I felt ashamed to say another word against him.

‘They won't, I kept telling myself, ‘they can’t. It’s too senseless
putting such a glorious life to the slaughter like some sacrificial beast,’
and this conviction served to calm me.

It was a special bonus to hear him still the following night, after each
of us had prepared for his own journey and we'd gone out again before
daybreak to be alone together once more.

‘Do you know,’ he said, amongst other things, ‘why I’ve never been
awed by death? I feel in me a life that no god has created and no mortal
man begotten. I believe we owe our being to ourselves and it’s only of
our own free desire that we’re so closely bound into the all.’

‘T’ve never heard you talk like this before,’ I answered.

‘And what,’ he continued, ‘what would this world be, were it not a
unison of free beings? did not of their own joyous impulse the living join
together from the very beginning in one full-voiced life, how wooden
would it be, how cold? what a heartless piece of work would it be?’

‘So here in the highest sense it were true,’ I replied, ‘without freedom
everything is dead.’

‘Yes indeed,’ he cried, ‘there’s not a blade of grass grows up unless it
has its own germ of life within! how much the more in me! and therefore,
my dear friend! because I feel myself free in the highest sense, because
I feel myself beginningless, therefore I believe that I’m endless, that I’m
indestructible. If a potter’s hand has made me, then let him smash his
vessel as he pleases. But that which lives within must be unbegotten,
must be divine of nature in its germ, sublime beyond all might and all
art, and therefore invulnerable, eternal.

‘We each have our mysteries, dear Hyperion! our more secret
thoughts; these have been mine; ever since I could think.

‘What lives is indestructible, stays free in its most deeply servile
form, stays intact and though you split it to the ground, stays unscathed
and though you shatter it to the marrow, and its essence flies away in
triumph through your fingers. — But the morning wind stirs; our ships
are awake. O my Hyperion! I have overcome; I’ve been able to bring
myself to speak my heart’s death sentence and separate you and me,
darling of my life! be gentle with me now! spare me the parting pains!
let’s be quick! come!’ —

A chill shot through all my bones as he uttered these words.

‘Oh, by your troth, Alabanda!’ I cried, prostrate before him, ‘must it
be, must it really be? You fuddled me unfairly, you carried me away and
left me reeling. Brother! you took from me even the presence of mind to
ask, “where are you going?”

‘I may not name the place, dear heart!’ he replied; ‘yet perhaps we
shall meet again one day.’

‘Meet again?’ I replied; ‘so that’s one faith I’m the richer by! and so
I'll become ever richer in faith and in the end there'll be nothing but faith
for me.’

‘Dearest!’ he cried, ‘where words are no help, let us be still! let us
make a manful end! You ruin the last moments for yourself.’

Meanwhile we’d come closer to the harbour.

‘One more thing!’ he said, when we were at his ship. ‘Greet your
Diotima! Love each other! be happy, you beautiful souls!’

‘O my Alabanda!’ I cried, ‘why can’t I go in your stead?”

‘Your calling is more beautiful,’ he replied; ‘stay with it! you belong
to her, that lovely being is from now on your world — Oh! since there
is no happiness without sacrifice, take me as sacrifice, O fate, and leave
the loving their joy!’ —

His heart began to overwhelm him, and he tore himself from me
and leapt into the ship to shorten the parting for himself and me. I felt
this moment like a thunderbolt that’s followed by night and deathly
stillness, but in the midst of the desolation my soul reared up to hold
him, the dear departing, and my arms darted towards him of their own
accord. ‘Woe! Alabanda! Alabanda!’ I cried, and heard from the ship a
muffled ‘Farewell’.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LVII]

It chanced that the vessel due to take me to Calauria delayed until
the evening, Alabanda having already gone his way that morning.

I stayed on the shore, weary with the pains of parting, stilly gazing
into the sea from one hour to another. My spirit told over the sorrowful
days of slowly dwindling youth, and adrift like the beautiful dove, it
hovered over the future. I wished to give myself strength, I took out my
long-forgotten lute to sing myself a song of fate that I’d once, in blithely
innocent youth, repeated after my Adamas.

You wander high in the light
On gentle ground, you blissful genii!
Heavenly radiant airs
Touching you soft,
As the hand of the harpist her

Hallowing strings.

Fatelessly, like the slumbering

Suckling, breathe the celestials;
Chaste preserved
In the modest bud,
Blossoms ever

For them the spirit,
And the blissful eyes

Gaze in eternal

Tranquil glory.

But to us it is given
In no place to rest,
They dwindle, they fall,
The suffering mortals
Blindling from one
Hour to another,
Like water from rock
To rock hurled down,

Year long into confusion below.

So I sang to the strings. I’d hardly finished when a boat came in and
I immediately recognized my servant who brought me a letter from
Diotima.

‘So you're still on earth?’ she wrote, ‘and see the daylight still? I’d
thought to find you elsewhere, my love! The letter you wrote before the
battle of Chesma I received earlier than you afterwards wished, and so
for a week I lived in the belief you’d thrown yourself into the arms of
death, until your servant arrived with the joyful news that you're still
alive. Besides, I’d heard a few days after the battle that the ship on which
I knew you to be had blown up with all hands lost.

‘But O sweet voice! once again I heard you, the language of the
beloved touched me once more like a May breeze, and for a moment
your beautiful hopeful joy, the lovely phantom of our future happiness
deluded me too.

‘Dear dreamer, why must I wake you? why can’t I say, “come
and make true the beautiful days you promised me!” But it’s too late,
Hyperion, it’s too late. Your maiden has withered since you went
away, a fire within has gently consumed me and there’s only a small
rest remaining. Don’t be dismayed! All that is natural purges itself, and
everywhere life’s blossom winds itself freer and freer of coarser stuff.

‘Dearest Hyperion! little did you think to hear this year my swansong.

‘It began soon after you'd left, and even in the days before our parting.
A force of spirit before which I took fright, an inner life before which the
life of the earth paled and dwindled like lamps of the night in the glow
of morning — shall I say it? I could have gone to Delphi and built the
god of inspiration a temple beneath the cliffs of ancient Parnassus, and, a
modern Pythia, kindled the flagging peoples with divine utterance, and
my soul knows that my maidenly mouth would have opened the eyes
of all the godforsaken and smoothed their dulled brows, so powerful
was the spirit of life in me! Yet ever more weary grew my mortal limbs
and dread weight pulled me relentlessly down. Oh! often in the stillness
of my bower I have wept for the roses of youth! they withered and
withered, and only from tears did your maiden’s cheek redden. They
were still the trees of old, it was the bower of old — there once stood
your Diotima, your child, Hyperion, before your joyful eyes, a flower

among flowers, and the powers of earth and heaven came peacefully
together in her; now she walked a stranger among the buds of May, and
her familiars, the lovely plants, nodded to her amiably, but she could
only grieve; yet I passed none by, yet one after another I bade farewell to
all the playmates of my youth, the groves and springs and whispering
hills.

‘Oh! as long as I still was able I would often make my sweet and
weary way up to the heights where you’d stayed with Notara, and
speak about you with our friend, as lightsomely as possible, so that he
shouldn’t write to you about me; but soon, when her heart grew too
loud, the hypocrite stole out into the garden, and then there I was at
the rail above the cliff where I once gazed down with you and out into
open nature, oh! where I stood, held by your hands, caressed by your
watchful eyes, in the first shuddering warming of love and wished to
pour out my overflowing soul like sacrificial wine into life’s abyss; there
Inow lurched around and cried my sorrow to the wind, and like a timid
bird my glance flitted about and barely dared look at the beautiful earth
from which I was to part.

‘That’s the way it’s gone with your maiden, Hyperion. Don’t ask
how? don’t explain this death to yourself! Whoever thinks to fathom
such a fate will end by cursing himself and the world, and yet there’s
not a soul to blame.

‘Shall I say it’s grief for you that’s killed me? oh no! oh no! it was
welcome to me, this grief, it gave the death I bore within me form and
grace; it’s in honour of your darling that you’re dying, I could now tell
myself. —

‘Or did my soul become too ripe for me in all the raptures of our
love, and is that why, like a headstrong youth, it will be held no more
in its humble home? tell me! was it my heart’s luxuriance that estranged
me from mortal life? is nature in me become through you, you glorious
man! too proud to put up with it any longer on this mediocre star? But
if you taught my soul to fly, why won’t you also teach it to return to
you? If you kindled the aether-loving fire, why wouldn’t you tend it for
me? — Hear me, my love! for the sake of your beautiful soul! don’t you
blame yourself for my death!

‘Could you hold me back when your fate pointed you on the selfsame
path? and if you had, in your heart’s heroic struggle, preached to
me — “be content, my child! and come to terms with the times” — would
you not have been the vainest of all the vain?

‘T will tell you plainly what I think. Your fire was alive in me, your
spirit had passed into me; but that would scarce have harmed, and only
your fate has made my new life deadly to me. Too mighty for me had
my soul become through you, it would through you have also stilled
again. You drew my life away from earth, you would have also had
the power to fetter me to earth, you would have bound my soul as in
a magic circle into your embracing arms; oh! just one of your heartfelt
glances would have held me fast, just one love speech of yours would
have turned me back into a happy wholesome child; yet when your own
fate drove you into spiritual solitude, like floodwater onto a mountain
peak, oh, only when I fully believed the storm of battle had burst open
the dungeon and my Hyperion had flown up into ancient freedom, that
was the turning point for me and soon it will be over.

‘T’ve made many words, and yet the great Roman perished silently
when her Brutus and the fatherland were writhing in their death throes.
But what better could I do in the best of my last days of life? — And
there are many things I still feel driven to say. Mute was my life; my
death is eloquent. Enough!

‘There’s just one thing more I must say to you.

‘You would have to go under, you'd have to despair, yet the spirit
will save you. No laurel will comfort you, and no wreath of myrtle;
Olympus will, the living and present, that eternally youthful blossoms
around all your senses. The beautiful world is my Olympus; in this you
will live, and with the holy beings of the world, the gods of nature, with
them you will be joyful.

‘Oh, be welcome, you good, you faithful! you deeply missed and
misjudged! children and elders! sun and earth and aether with all the
living souls that play about you, as you play about them, in eternal

love! Oh, take all-venturing men, take back the fugitives into the
family of gods, take them up into the home of nature from which they
absconded! —

‘You know this word, Hyperion! You began it in me. You will fulfil it
in yourself, and only then rest.

‘That’s enough for me to die in joy as a Greek maiden.

‘Those poor souls who know nothing but their own sorry handiwork,
who are merely slaves of need and scorn genius, and who do not honour
you, childlike life of nature! let them fear death. Their yoke is become
their world; they know nothing better than their bondage; dread the
freedom of the gods that death gives us?

‘But I don’t! I have gone beyond the patchwork made by hand of
man, I have felt the life of nature that passes all thought — even if I
became a plant, would the harm be so great? — I shall be. How should I
be lost from the sphere of life where the love eternal, that is common to
all, holds all natures together? How should I depart from the covenant
that binds all beings? This is not so easily broken as the loose bonds of
our age. It’s not like a market day when folk flock together and make
a great bustle and then disperse. No! by the spirit that unites us, by the
god’s spirit that is proper to each and common to all! no! no! in nature’s
covenant troth is no dream. We part to be only more inwardly one, more
divinely at peace with all, with ourselves. We die in order to live.

‘I shall be; I do not ask what I shall become. To be, to live, that is
enough, that is the glory of the gods; and that is why all that is life is
equal in the divine world, and there are there no masters and menials.
Natures live together like lovers; they have all in common, spirit, joy
and eternal youth.

‘Permanence is the choice of the stars, in silent fullness of life they
constantly wheel, knowing no age. We embody perfection in change,
splitting the great chords of joy into wandering melodies. Like harpers
around the thrones of the elders, we live, ourselves divine, around the
silent gods of the world, with life’s fleeting song we soften the blissful
earnest of the sun-god and the others.

‘Look up into the world! is it not like a wandering triumphal pageant
where nature celebrates its eternal victory over all corruption? and does
not life for its greater glory take with it death in golden chains, as once
the general would take with him captive kings? and we, we're like the

virgins and youths who with dance and song, in shifting shapes and
sounds, accompany the majestic procession.

‘Now let me be still. To say more would be too much. We shall likely
meet again. —

‘Grieving youth! soon, soon you will be happier. Your laurel failed
to ripen and your myrtles faded, for priest you shall be of divine nature,
and your poetic days burgeon already. Oh, could I only see you in your
future beauty! Farewell.’

At the same time I received a letter from Notara in which he wrote:

‘The day after she’d written to you for the last time she grew quite
still, spoke only a few more words, and then said that she would rather
part in fire from the earth than be buried, and we should gather her
ashes in an urn and set it in the woods at the spot where you, my dear
friend! had first met her. Soon after, when it began to grow dark, she
said goodnight to us as if she wished to sleep, and wrapped her arms
around her lovely head; until toward morning we heard her breathing.
As it then became wholly still and I heard nothing more, I went over to
her and listened.

‘O Hyperion! what more shall I say? It was finished and our plaints
awakened her no more.

‘It isa terrible mystery that such a life should die, and I have to confess
to you that I myself have neither sense nor faith since I witnessed this.

‘Yet better always a beautiful death, Hyperion! than such a torpid life
as ours now is.

‘Warding off flies, that’s our work in the future, and gnawing on the
things of the world like children on dried orris root, that’s our joy in the
end. Growing old amongst youthful peoples seems to me a delight, but
growing old where all is old seems to me worse than anything. —

‘I'm tempted to advise you, my Hyperion! not to come here. I know
you. It would rob you of your senses. Besides, you're not safe here. My
dear friend! think of Diotima’s mother, think of me and spare yourself!

‘I have to confess, I shudder when I ponder your fate. But then I also
believe, it’s not the deeper springs that searing summer dries up, only
the shallow rain-stream. I’ve seen you at moments, Hyperion! when you
seemed to me a higher being. Now you're put to the test, and that’s
going to show who you are. Farewell.’

So Notara wrote; and you ask, my Bellarmin! how I feel now, telling
you this?

My dearest friend! I’m at peace, for I want no better than the gods.
Must not everything suffer? And the nobler it is, the more deeply. Does
not holy nature suffer? O my godhead! that you could grieve as you
are blissful is something I long failed to grasp. But the bliss that does
not suffer is sleep, and without death there is no life. Should you be,
like a child, eternal and slumber as nothingness? forego the victory? not
pass through all the perfections? Yes! yes! worthy is pain to lie at men’s
hearts and be your familiar, O nature! For it alone leads from one bliss
to the next, and there can be no other companion. —

Once Id begun to revive again, I wrote to Notara from Sicily where
I'd first been brought by ship from Paros:

‘I’ve obeyed you, dear friend! I’m already far away from you all, and
want to give you my news now; but words come hard to me; you won’t
mind my confessing that. The blessed, among whom Diotima is now,
do not speak much; in my night, in the depths of the grieving, speech
too is at an end.

‘My Diotima died a beautiful death; you're right; and it’s this that
rouses me and gives me back my soul.

‘But it’s no longer the same world I return to. I’m a stranger, like the
unburied when they come up from Acheron, and were I even on my
home island, in the gardens of my youth that are barred to me by my
father, oh! still, still I should be a stranger in the earth and no god can
any longer link me to the past.

‘Yes! it’s all over. I just must tell myself that time and again, have
the thought bind my soul so that it stay calm and not become inflamed
through senseless childish efforts.

‘It’s all over; and even could I weep, beautiful divinity, as once you
wept for Adonis, my Diotima will still not return to me and my heart’s
word has lost its power, for the winds alone hear me.

‘Oh, God! and that I myself am nothing, and the meanest workman
can say he’s achieved more than I! that they may comfort themselves, the
poor in spirit, and smile and chide me as a dreamer because my deeds
failed to ripen, because my arms are not free, because my times are like
the raging Procrustes who cast the men he captured into a child’s cradle
and, so that they'd fit into the little bed, would hack off their limbs.

‘If only it weren’t too utterly dreary to fling oneself into the foolish
mob and be torn to pieces by it! or if only noble blood could feel no
shame at mingling with the blood of slaves! oh, if there were a banner,
gods! that my Alabanda might serve under, a Thermopylae where I
could bleed it out with honour, all the lonely love I'll never more need!
To be sure it would be better if I could live, live, and in the new temples,
in the newly assembled agora of our people, still the great grief with
great joy; but on that I shall be silent, for Ill merely weep my strength
wholly away if I think upon it all.

‘Oh, Notara! with me too it’s over; my own soul has grown hateful
to me because I must blame it for Diotima’s being dead, and the ideas
of my youth I deemed so grand mean nothing to me any more. They
poisoned my Diotima, didn’t they!

‘And now tell me, where is there still a refuge? — Yesterday I was up
on Etna. There came to my mind the great Sicilian who once, wearied
with counting the hours and intimate with the soul of the world,
plunged himself down in his bold lust for life, into the glorious flames;
for the frigid poet had needed the fire to warm himself by, as someone
mockingly said of him.

‘Oh, how gladly would I have drawn such mockery upon myself!
but one must think more highly of oneself than I do to fly thus uncalled
into the heart of nature, or whatever else you like to call it, for truly! the
way Iam now, I have no name for things and all is confusion.

‘Notara! and now tell me, where is there still a refuge?

‘In the woods of Calauria? — Yes! in the verdant darkness there,
where stand our trees, confidants of our love, where like the red glow of
sunset their dying leaves fall upon Diotima’s urn, and their lovely heads
bend above Diotima’s urn, gently growing old until they too sink down
over the beloved ashes, — there, there I might dwell as I would wish!

‘But you counsel me to stay away, think I’m not safe in Calauria, and
it may be so.

‘T know full well you'll point me to Alabanda. But just hear this! he’s
destroyed! even that firm and limber stem is blasted, and the boys will
pick up the splinters to make themselves a jolly fire. He’s gone; he’s
got certain good friends who will ease things for him, who have quite
special skills in relieving anyone on whom life lies somewhat heavy;
he’s paying them a visit, and why? because there’s nothing else for him

to do, or, if you would know it all, because there’s a passion gnawing at
his heart, and do you know for whom? for Diotima; he thinks she’s still
alive, wedded to me and happy — poor Alabanda! and now she belongs
to you and me both!

‘He headed out to the east, and as for me, I’m taking ship
northwestward, since chance will have it so. —

‘And now farewell to you all! all you dear ones who've lain close to
my heart, friends of my youth and you parents and all you dear Greeks,
you who suffer!

‘You winds that nourished me in tender childhood, and you dark
laurel woods and you cliffs of the coast and you majestic waters that
taught my spirit to sense great things — and oh! you monuments of
mourning, where my melancholy began, you holy walls that girdled
heroes’ cities, and you ancient gates that many a beautiful wanderer
passed through, you temple pillars and you rubble of the gods! and
you, O Diotima! and you valleys of my love, and you streams that once
witnessed the blissful figure, you trees where she would gladden, you
springtimes where she the lovely lived, together with her flowers, don’t,
don’t part from me! yet if it must be, you sweet memories! then you too
fade away and leave me, for man can change nothing and the light of life
comes and goes as it will.’

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LVIII]

So I came among the Germans. I didn’t ask for much and was
prepared to find even less. Humbly I came like homeless blind Oedipus
to the gates of Athens, where the grove of the gods welcomed him and
he was met by beautiful souls —

How differently I fared!

Barbarians of old, made yet more barbarous by industry and learning
and even religion, deeply incapable of any godly feeling, spoiled to
the core for the joys of the holy graces, in every degree of profligacy
and pettiness an offence to every decent soul, dull and full of discord
like the shards of a discarded vessel — these, my Bellarmin! were my
comforters.

They’re harsh words, but I'll say them nonetheless, because it’s the
truth: I can imagine no people more fragmented than the Germans.

You see craftsmen, but no human beings, philosophers, but no human
beings, priests, but no human beings, masters and menials, youths and
elders, but no human beings — is this not like a battlefield where hands
and arms and all the limbs lie about in pieces while the spilled life-blood
seeps away into the sand?

To each his own trade, you will say, and so do I. Only he must
pursue it with his whole soul, must not choke every energy within him
that doesn’t quite befit his title, must not with such niggardly timidity
pretend to be to the letter only what he’s called; with earnest, with love
he must be what he is, then there lives a spirit in all he does, and if he’s
boxed into a specialism in which the spirit cannot thrive, then let him
thrust it from him with contempt and learn to use a plough! But your
Germans like to stick with what’s most needful, and that’s why there’s
so much bungled work amongst them, so little that is free and genuinely
pleasing. But this one could put up with if only such beings didn’t have
to be feelingless for all beautiful life, if only the curse of godforsaken
unnature didn’t everywhere rest upon such a people. —

The virtues of the ancients were but glittering vices, some wicked
tongue — I can’t tell you which — once said; and yet even their vices
are virtues, for then still lived a childlike, a beautiful spirit, and nothing
they did was done without soul. But the virtues of the Germans are a
glittering evil and nothing more; for they are only works of necessity, in
craven fear wrung from the wasted heart with slavish effort, and leave
without solace any pure soul that would nourish itself on the beautiful,
oh! that, spoiled by the holy harmony in nobler natures, cannot thole the
discord screeching in all the dead orderliness of such beings.

I tell you: there’s nothing sacred that’s not profaned, that’s not
debased to miserable makeshift with these people, and what is even
amongst savages mostly kept divinely pure, these all-calculating
barbarians approach as one might go about a trade, and they can do
no other, for once a human being has been drilled, it serves its ends,
it seeks its profit, it dreams no more, God forbid! it remains staid, and
when it celebrates and when it loves and when it prays and even when
the lovely festival of spring, when the world’s season of reconciliation
dissolves all care and conjures innocence into a guilty heart, when
drunk with the sun’s warm rays the slave joyfully forgets his chains,
and softened by the god-inspired breath the foes of man are full of

peace, like children — when even the caterpillar takes wing and the
tipsy bee swarms, still will the German stick inside his box and not be
bothered much about the weather!

But you shall judge, holy nature! For if only they were modest, these
people, didn’t make themselves the measure for the better amongst
them! if only they’d not belittle what they’re not, and yet, if belittle they
must, if only they didn’t mock the divine! —

Or isn’t divine what you mock and call soulless? Isn’t better than
your babble the air that you drink? the rays of the sun, aren’t they
nobler than all of you in your cleverness? the earth’s springs and the
morning dew refresh your groves; can you do that? Oh! you can kill,
but you can’t bring to life if love doesn’t do it, and that’s not from you,
you didn’t invent it. You fret and you brood about how to flee fate, and
are flummoxed when your childish arts prove bootless; meanwhile the
stars wander blithely above. You debase it, you tear it apart, where it
puts up with you, tolerant nature, and yet it endures in unending youth,
its autumn and spring you can’t drive away, its aether is something you
won't defile.

Oh, it must be divine because you're suffered to destroy and yet it
doesn’t age and in your spite the beautiful stays beautiful! —

And it’s heart-rending to see your poets, your artists, and all who
still honour the genius, who love the beautiful and nurture it. The good
souls! They live in the world like strangers in their own house, they are
just like long-suffering Ulysses when he sat at his door in beggar’s garb
while the shameless suitors roistered in the hall and asked: ‘Who has
brought us this vagabond?’

Full of love and spirit and hope its youthful sons of the muses grow
towards maturity among the German people; you see them seven years
later, and they wander like shades, silent and cold, they’re like soil the
enemy has sown with salt so that it shall never more bring forth a blade
of grass; and when they speak, woe unto him that understands them!
who can see in the storming titanic energy, as in their protean skills, the
despairing battle their troubled beautiful spirit must fight against the
barbarians with which it has to deal.

‘All things on earth are imperfect,’ that’s the eternal refrain of the
Germans. If only someone would tell these godforsaken people that
with them all things are only so imperfect because they leave nothing

pure unsullied, nothing sacred unfumbled by their clumsy hands, that
with them nothing thrives because they will not honour the root of all
thriving, divine nature, that with them life is precisely so vapid and
fretful and brimming with cold dumb discord because they scorn the
genius that brings energy and nobility to human activity, serenity to
suffering, and love and brotherhood to cities and homes.

And that too is the reason why they’re so afraid of death, and for
the sake of their oyster-like existence suffer all the shame, because
they know of nothing higher than the handiwork they’ve cobbled for
themselves.

OBellarmin! where a people loves the beautiful, where it honours the
genius in its artists, there blows like breath of life a universal spirit, the
bashful mind unfolds, self-conceit melts away, and all hearts are pious
and great, and inspiration brings forth heroes. The homeland of all men
is with such a people and there the stranger loves to linger. But where
divine nature and its artists are so abused, oh! there life’s greatest joy
is gone, and any other star is better than the earth. There men, though
born beautiful, become ever more wild and wasted; a servile disposition
grows and with it rude courage; intemperance grows with cares, and
with opulence hunger and fear of famine; each year’s blessing becomes
a curse and all the gods take flight.

And woe to the stranger who wanders out of love and comes to such
a people, and thrice woe to him who, driven like me by great pain, a
beggar of my kind, comes to such a people! —

Enough! you know me, you won’t take it amiss, Bellarmin! I spoke
in your name too, I spoke for all who live in this land and suffer as I
suffered there.

Hyperion to Bellarmin [LIX]

I wanted to get away from Germany now. I looked for nothing more
amongst these people, I’d been hurt enough by merciless affronts, and
didn’t want my soul to wholly bleed to death amongst such men. But
the heavenly spring held me back; it was the only joy that remained to
me, it was my last love, how could I still think of other things and leave
the land where spring was too?

Bellarmin! I’d never so fully felt the old and firm and fateful saying
that for the heart a new bliss rises when it holds out and endures through

the midnight of grief, and that, like nightingale’s singing in darkness,
it’s in deep suffering that first divinely sounds for us the lifesong of the
world. For now I lived with the blossoming trees as with genii, and the
limpid streams flowing beneath them whispered, like voices of gods,
the sorrow from my breast. And so it fared with me everywhere, dear
friend! — when I rested in the grass and tender life greened all about
me, when I climbed the warm hill where the rose grew wild around the
stony path, and when I boated along the breezy banks of the river and
round all the islands it tenderly hugs.

And when on many a morning, like the sick to the healing spring, I’d
climb to the mountain’s summit through sleeping flowers, whilst to my
side, sated with sweet slumber, the dear birds flew from the bush, in the
half-light reeling and greedy for day, and the quickening breeze bore up
already the prayers of the valleys, the voices of the herd, and the tones of
the morning bells, and now the lofty light, divinely serene, came along
its habitual path, enchanting the earth with immortal life, so that her
heart warmed and all her children felt themselves once more — oh, like
the moon, that still lingered in heaven to share in the joy of the day, I too
then stood lonely above the plains, weeping tears of love down to the
shores and the glancing waters, and long couldn’t turn away my gaze.

Or of an evening when I’d wander far into the valley, to the cradle of
the spring where around me rushed the dark crowns of the oaks, and
nature entombed me in her peace like a dying saint; when the earth
was now a Shadow and viewless life whispered through the branches,
through the treetops, and above the treetops the evening cloud stood
still, a shining mountain range from which the rays of heaven flowed
down to me like streams to quench the wanderer’s thirst —

‘O sun, O you breezes,’ I’d then call out, ‘with you alone my heart
still lives, as amongst brothers!’

Thus I gave myself up more and more to blissful nature, and almost
too endlessly. How gladly I’d have become a child to be closer to her!
how gladly I’d have known less and become like the pure ray of light
to be closer to her! Oh, to feel myself for a moment in her peace, her
beauty, how much more that meant to me than years full of thinking,
than all the ventures of all-venturing men! What Id learned, what Id
done in my life melted away like ice, and all youth’s designs died away
in me; and O you dear ones, who are distant, you dead and you living,
how wholly one we were!

Once I sat far away in a field, by a burn, in the shade of ivy-green
rocks and overhanging flowering bushes. It was the most beautiful noon
I’ve known. Sweet breezes wafted and in morning freshness the land
still shone and serene in its native aether smiled the light. The people
had gone away to rest at the homely table from their toil; my love was
alone with the spring, and there was an unfathomable longing in me.
‘Diotima,’ I cried, ‘where are you? oh, where are you?’ And it seemed
to me I heard Diotima’s voice, the voice that used to gladden me in the
days of joy —

‘Im with my kindred,’ she called, ‘with your kindred, those the
erring human spirit does not know!’

A gentle terror seized me and all thought passed away in me.

‘O dear words from holy mouth,’ I cried, once again aroused, ‘dear
riddle, can I grasp you?’

And one last time I looked back into the cold night of men and
shuddered and wept for joy that I was so blissful, and words I spoke,
it seems to me, but they were like the fire’s rush when up it flares and
leaves behind the ashes —

“O you,” so I thought, “with your gods, nature! I’ve dreamed it out,
the dream of human things, and say that only you live, and all that
peaceless men have wrought and thought, it melts away like pearls of
wax before your flames!

“How long have they done without you? oh, how long have their
rabble abused you, called you vulgar, you and your gods, the quick, the
blissfully serene!

“Men fall from you like rotting fruit, oh, let them perish, for then
they return to your root, and I, O tree of life, may I green again with
you and breathe around your crown with all your budding branches!
peacefully and deeply, for we’ve all of us grown high from that seed of
golden grain!

“You springs of the earth! you flowers! and you forests and you
eagles and you fraternal light! how old and new is our love! — We
are free, we don’t anxiously strive to be outwardly equal; how should
not vary the modes of life? but we all love the aether, and deep in our
innermost being we are all of us like.

“We too, we too are not parted, Diotima! and the tears for you haven’t
grasped it. We are living tones, we sound together in your harmony,
nature! who can split that asunder? who will part lovers? —

“O soul! soul! beauty of the world! indestructible! rapturing! with
your eternal youth! you are; what then is death and all the woe of
men? — Oh! many empty words have been made by these strange
brethren. Yet all things proceed from pleasure, and everything ends in
peace.

“The dissonances of the world are like lovers’ tiffs. There’s
reconciliation in the middle of strife, and all that’s apart comes together
again.

“The arteries part and return in the heart and one eternal glowing
life is All.”

So I thought. More anon.
