Letter VIII. 

USBEK TO HIS FRIEND RuSTAN, AT ISPAHAN. 

I got your letter at Erzeroum, where I am now. I was 
quite certain that my departure would cause some stir, 
but that gives me no trouble : which would you have 
me obey—the petty maxims that guide my enemies, or 
the dictates of my own free soul ? 

From my earliest youth I have been a courtier; and 
yet I make bold to say that my heart has remained un¬ 
corrupted : indeed, I conceived the grand idea of daring 
to be virtuous even at court. From the moment I recog¬ 
nized vice, I withdrew from it; afterwards, when I ap¬ 
proached it, it was only to unmask it. I carried my 
veracity even to the foot of the throne, and spoke a lan¬ 
guage never heard there before; I disconcerted flattery, 
amazing at the same time the idol and its worshippers. 

But when I saw that my sincerity had made me enemies, 
and had brought upon me the jealousy of the ministers, 
without attracting the favour of the prince, I determined 
to forsake a corrupt court in which my unseconded virtue 
could no longer maintain me. I feigned a mighty interest 
in science; and, by dint of pretending, soon became really 


LETTER VIII. 


21 


attached to it. I ceased to be a man of affairs, and 
retired to a house in the country. But even here perse¬ 
cution followed me: the malice of my enemies almost 
deprived me of the means of protecting myself. Infor¬ 
mation received in secret led me to consider my position 
seriously: I resolved to leave my native land, and my 
withdrawal from court supplied a plausible excuse. I 
waited on the king; I emphasized the great desire I had 
to acquaint myself with the sciences of the west, and 
hinted that my travels might even be of service to him. 
I found favour in the king’s sight; I set out, and snatched 
from my enemies their expected victim. 

Here, Rustan, you have the true motive of my journey. 
Let them talk in Ispahan; say nothing in my defence 
except to my friends. Leave the evil-disposed to their 
misconstructions; I would be too happy if that were the 
only harm they could do me. 

They discuss me at present; perhaps I shall soon be 
forgotten, and my friends .... But no, I will not, 
Rustan, resign myself to these sad thoughts: I will always 
be dear to them ; I rely upon their faithfulness as upon 
yours. 

Erzeroum, the 20th of the second moon 
of Gemmadi, 1 1711. 

1 The two Gemmadis, or Gemalis, are the fifth and sixth months 
of the Persian year. Gemal-i-ul-awal is the first of these. 


22 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
