Letter CXLII. 

Rica to Usbek, at * # * 

Here is a letter which I received yesterday from a learned 
man: you will think it remarkable. 

“Sir, 

“ Six months ago I inherited from a very rich uncle five 
or six thousand livres and a magnificently furnished man- 


LETTER CXLI1. 


153 


sion. It is delightful to have wealth, when one knows 
how to make a good use of it. I have no ambition, nor 
any taste for pleasure : I am almost always shut up in a 
little room, where I lead the life of a savant. It is in 
such a place that the diligent antiquary is to be found. 

“ When my uncle died, I was very anxious to have 
him buried with the ceremonies observed by the ancient 
Greeks and Romans: but at that time I had neither 
lachrymatories, nor urns, nor antique lamps. 

“Since then, however, I have provided myself with 
these precious rarities. Some days ago I sold my silver 
plate in order to buy an earthenware lamp which had 
given light to a Stoic philosopher. I have disposed of all 
the glass with which my uncle had covered almost all the 
walls of his rooms, that I might possess a little mirror, 
somewhat cracked, which had formerly been used by 
Virgil: it charms me to see my own features where those 
of the swan of Mantua have been reflected. That is not 
all: I have bought for a hundred louis-d’or five or six 
pieces of copper money which were current two thousand 
years ago. I do not think I have -now in my house a 
single piece of furniture which was not made before the 
fall of the Roman empire-. I have a cupboard full of the 
most valuable and costly manuscripts. Although it is 
ruining my sight, I much prefer to read them than printed 
copies, which are not so correct, and which are in every¬ 
body’s hands. Although I hardly ever go out, that does 
not prevent me from having an ungovernable passion to 
be acquainted with all the old roads which date from the 


11. 


x 


PE HSIAN LETTERS. 


*54 

time of the Romans. There is one near my house which 
was made by a proconsul of Gaul about twelve hundred 
years ago. When I go to my place in the country, 
I never fail to take it, although it is very inconvenient, 
and leads me more than a league out of my way: but 
what really angers me are the wooden posts stuck up at 
certain intervals to indicate the distances of the neigh¬ 
bouring towns. I am in despair at the sight of these 
signposts, wretched substitutes for the military columns 
that stood there formerly: I have no doubt that I shall 
cause them to be set up again by my heirs, and that I 
shall be able to leave a will compelling them to do it. If, 
sir, you have such a thing as a Persian manuscript, you 
would oblige me very much by letting me have it: I will 
pay you your own price, and will give you into the bargain 
some works of mine, from which you will see that I am 
not a useless member of the republic of letters. Among 
them you will notice a dissertation in which I prove that 
the crown used formerly in triumphs, was of oak and not 
of laurel: you will admire another in which I show 
clearly, by learned conjectures deduced from the weightiest 
Greek authors, that Cambyses was wounded, not in the 
right leg, but in the left; in another I demonstrate that a 
low forehead was a beauty much in request among the 
Romans. I will send you also a quarto volume, contain¬ 
ing the explanation of a line in the sixth book of Virgil’s 
j®neid. All these things you will receive in a few days; 
and in the meantime I content myself with sending you 
the accompanying fragment of an ancient Greek mytho- 


LETTER CXLII. 


155 


logist, which has not yet been published, and which I 
discovered in the dust of a library. I must leave you 
now for an important matter which I have in hand, 
namely, the restoration of a beautiful passage in Pliny the 
naturalist, which has been strangely disfigured by the 
copyists of the fifth century. I am,” etc. 


Fragment of an ancient Mythologist. 

“In an island near the Orcades, a child was born 
whose father was j®olus, the god of the winds, and his 
mother a nymph of Caledonia . 1 They tell of him that he 
learned unaided to count with his fingers; and that from 
his fourth year he distinguished metals so well, that his 
mother having given him a ring of tin in exchange for one 
of gold, he perceived the deceit, .and threw it away. 

“ When he had grown up, his father taught him the 
secret of enclosing the winds in skins, which he afterwards 
sold to all the travellers : but as the trade in winds was 
not very brisk in his country, he left it, and went up 
and down the world, accompanied by the blind god of 
chance. 

“ During his travels he learned that gold glittered in 
every part of Betica ; 1 and he hurried thither at once. 
He was very badly received by Saturn , 3 who reigned then: 
but that god having quitted the earth, he judged it wise 

1 The Scotch financier, Law, of whose system this allegory is a 
satire. 

2 France. 


3 Louis XIV. 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


156 

to go into all the cross-roads and cry continually in a 
hoarse voice, ‘People of Betica, you think yourselves 
rich, because you have silver and gold! I pity your 
error. Be ruled by me: leave the land of the base 
metals; come into'the empire of the imagination, and I 
promise you riches which will astonish even you.’ He 
immediately opened a great number of the skins which 
he had brought with him, and dealt out his merchandise 
to all who wished it. 

“ Next morning he returned to the same cross-roads, 
and cried, ‘ People of Betica, would you be rich ? Ima¬ 
gine that I am very rich, and that you are very rich : get 
yourselves into the belief every morning that your for¬ 
tune has been doubled during the night: rise, then, and 
if you have any creditors, go and pay them with what 
you have imagined, and tell them to imagine in their 
turn.’ 

“A few days after he appeared again, and spoke as 
follows: ‘ People of Betica, I perceive that your imagina¬ 
tion is weaker than it was a day or two ago; try to bring 
it up to the strength of mine: I will place before you 
every morning a bill, which will be the source of wealth 
for you : you will see only four words , 1 but they will be 
of the highest significance, as they will settle the portions 
of your wives, the fortunes of your children, and the 
number of your domestics. And, as for you ’—address¬ 
ing those of the crowd who were nearest him—‘ as for 


1 Le cours des actions , the price of shares. 


LETTER CXLII. 


157 


you, my dear children (I may call you by that name, 
since you have received from me a second birth), my 
bill shall decide as to the magnificence of your equipages, 
the splendour of your feasts, and the number and pensions 
of your mistresses.’ 

“ Some days later he came into the street, quite out 
of breath, and cried out in a violent passion, ' People of 
Betica, I counselled you to imagine, but you have not 
done so: well then, I now command you to imagine.’ 
With that he left them abruptly; but on second thoughts 
retraced his steps. ‘ I understand that some of you are 
odious enough to keep your gold and silver. For the 
silver, let it go: but the gold . . . the gold . . . Ah! 
that stirs my anger! . . . I swear, by my sacred wind¬ 
bags, that if you do not bring it to me, I will inflict dire 
punishment upon you .’ 1 Then he added, in the most 
seductive manner imaginable, ‘ Do you think it is to 
keep these wretched metals that I ask them from you ? 
A proof of my good faith is, that when you brought me 
them some days ago, I gave you back at once one 
half .’ 3 

“ Next day, he kept at some distance, and endeavoured 
with soft and flattering voice to worm himself into their 
favour. ‘ People of Betica, I learn that a portion of your 
wealth is in foreign countries : I beg you to have it sent 

1 It had been decreed that all specie should be taken to the 
Bank. 

a At the beginning of Law’s “ system,” claims on the Bank were 
paid half in paper and half in cash. 


>58 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


to me; 1 it will oblige me very much, and I will never 
forget your kindness.’ 

“ The son of ^Eolus was addressing people who were 
in no mood to be amused, yet they could not restrain 
their laughter; which caused him to slink away in a 
shamefaced manner. But, his courage having returned, 
he risked another little petition. 1 1 know that you have 
precious stones : in the name of Jupiter, get rid of them; 
nothing will so impoverish you as things of that kind; 
get rid of them, I tell you.“ Should you be unable to do 
so yourselves, I can provide excellent agents. What 
wealth will pour in upon you, if you follow my advice ! 
Yes, I promise you the very best my windbags contain.’ 

“ Then he got up on a platform, and, in a more reso¬ 
lute tone, said, ‘ People of Betica, I have compared the 
happy condition in which you now are with that in which 
I found you when I first came here; I behold you the 
richest people in the world : but, in order to crown your 
good fortune, allow me to deprive you of the half of your 
wealth.’ With these words, the son of ^Eolus soared 
away on rapid wings, and left his audience dumb with 
amazement, a result which brought him back next day, 
when he spoke as follows: * I perceived yesterday that 
my speech displeased you very much. Very well! sup¬ 
pose that I have said nothing at all as yet. It is quite 
true; one half is too much. We must find some other 
expedient to arrive at the result which I have proposed. 

1 A royal order, issued 20th June, 1720. 

2 A decree of the 4th of July, 1720. 


LETTER CXLIII. 


159 


Let us gather all our wealth into one place; we can do 
so easily, because it does not occupy much space.’ Im¬ 
mediately three-quarters of their wealth had disappeared.” 1 

Paris, the 9th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1720.
