Letter CVI. 

Rhedj to Usbek, at Paris. 

In one of your letters you said much to me about the arts 
and sciences cultivated in the west. You are inclined to 
regard me as a barbarian; but I am not certain that the 
profit derived from them recompenses men for the bad 
use to which they are put every day. I have heard it 
said that the invention of bombs alone has deprived all 
the nations of Europe of freedom. The princes being no 
longer able to trust the guardianship of towns to the 
citizens, who would surrender them at the first bomb, 
have made it a pretext for keeping large bodies of regular 
troops, whom they have since used to oppress their 
subjects. 

You know that since the invention of gunpowder no 
place is impregnable; that is to say, Usbek, that there is 
no longer upon the earth a refuge from injustice and 
violence. 

I dread always lest they should at last discover some 
secret which will furnish them with a briefer method of 
destroying men, by killing them off wholesale in tribes 
and nations. 

You have read the historians : think of them seriously; 
almost all monarchies have been founded upon ignorance 
of the arts, and have been destroyed by their over-cultiva¬ 
tion. The ancient empire of Persia may furnish us with 
an example at our own doors. 


LETTER CVI. 


63 


I have not been long in Europe; yet I have heard 
sensible people talk of the ravages of alchemy. It seems 
to be a fourth plague, which ruins men, destroying them 
one by' one, but continually; while war, pestilence, and 
famine destroy them in the mass, but at intervals. 

Of what advantage has the invention of the mariner’s 
compass been to us, and the discovery of so many nations 
who have given us more diseases than wealth ? Gold and 
silver have been established by a general agreement as the 
means of purchasing all goods, and as a pledge of their 
value, because these metals are rare, and useless for any 
other purpose: of what consequence was it to us, then, 
that they should become more common, and that to mark 
the value of any commodity, we should have two or three 
signs in place of one ? This was only more inconvenient. 

But, on the other hand, this invention has been hurtful 
to the countries of the New World. Entire nations have 
been destroyed; and those who have escaped death have 
been reduced to a slavery so dreadful, that the description 
of it makes even a Mussulman shudder. 

Happy in their ignorance are the children of Mo¬ 
hammed ! Their amiable simplicity, so dear to our holy 
Prophet, perpetually recalls to me the artlessness of the 
olden time, and the peace which reigned in the hearts of 
our first fathers. 

Venice, the 5th of the moon of 
Rhamazan, 1717. 


6 4 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
