Letter XLIV. 

USBEK TO RHEDI, AT VENICE. 

There are in France three privileged classes: the church, 
the sword, and the gown. Each has such a sovereign 
contempt for the other two, that sometimes a man who 
deserves to be looked down upon because he is a fool, is 
despised only because he is a lawyer. 


96 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


All classes, including the meanest workmen, contend 
for the excellence of the craft they have chosen; each 
man exalts himself at the expense of some other of a 
different profession, according to the idea which he has 
formed of the superiority of his own. 

They all resemble, more or less, a certain woman of 
the province of Erivan, who, having received some favour 
from one of our monarchs, wished a thousand times, in 
the blessings she showered upon him, that Heaven would 
make him governor of Erivan. 

I have read in a history, how some men belonging to 
the crew of a French vessel which had anchored off the 
coast of Guinea, went ashore in order to buy some 
sheep. They were led before the king, who was admini¬ 
stering justice to his subjects under a tree. He sat 
upon his throne, that is to say, upon a block of wood, as 
proudly as if it had been the seat of the Great Mogul. 
His guard consisted of three or four men armed with 
pointed staves; an umbrella served as canopy to protect 
him from the heat of the sun; for ornaments, he and his 
consort wore nothing but their own black skins and some 
rings. This prince, whose vanity was greater even than 
his poverty, asked the strangers if they talked much of 
him in France. He imagined that his fame must have 
gone forth to the ends of the earth; and, unlike that 
conqueror of whom it is said that he had silenced all the 
earth, he for his part believed that he kept the whole 
world chattering. 

When the Khan of Tartary has eaten, a herald an- 


LETTER XLV. 


97 


nounces that all the princes of the earth may now go to 
dinner if they wish; that barbarian, whose food is milk, 
who has no house, and who lives only by brigandage, 
looks upon all the kings of the world as his slaves, and 
insults them regularly twice a day. 

Paris, the 28th of the moon of 
Rhegeb, 1713.
