Letter CXXIII. 

USBEK TO THE SAME. 

The propagation of the species is wonderfully aided by 
a mild government. All republics are a standing proof 
of this ; especially Switzerland and Holland, which, with 
regard to the nature of the land, are the two worst 
countries in Europe, and which are yet the most 
populous. 


102 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


Nothing attracts strangers more than liberty, and its 
accompaniment, wealth : the latter is sought after for 
itself, and our necessity leads us into those countries in 
which we find the former. 

Mankind multiplies in a country which affords abun¬ 
dance for the children, without diminishing in the least 
the parents’ provision. 

That very equality of the citizens which generally pro¬ 
duces equality in their fortunes, brings plenty arid vigour 
into all the parts of the body politic, and spreads these 
blessings throughout the whole state. 

It is not so in countries subject to arbitrary power : 
the prince, the courtiers, and a few private persons, 
possess all the wealth, while all the rest groan in extreme 
poverty. 

If a man is not well off, and feels that his children 
would be poorer than he, he will not marry; or if he does, 
he will be afraid of having too great a number of chil¬ 
dren, who would complete the ruin of his fortune and 
sink even lower than their father. 

I admit that the boor or peasant, once married, will 
increase the race without any regard to his poverty or 
wealth; that consideration does not affect him : he has 
always a safe inheritance to leave his children, and that 
is his plough; so nothing withholds him from following 
blindly the instincts of nature. 

But of what use to a state are those crowds of children 
which waste away in misery? They perish almost as 
rapidly as they are bom: they never thrive : feeble and 


LETTER CXXIV. 


i°3 


impotent, they die retail in a thousand ways, or are 
carried off wholesale by those frequent epidemics which 
poverty and bad diet always produce : those who escape 
attain the age of manhood without possessing its vigour, 
and waste away during the rest of their lives. 

Men are like plants which never flourish if they are not 
well cultivated: among poor people, the race declines and 
sometimes even degenerates. 

France supplies a great proof of all this. During the 
late wars, the dread which all the youths had of being 
enrolled in the militia forced them to marry, and that at 
too tender an age and in the bosom of poverty. A great 
many children were born of these numerous marriages 
who are not now to be found in France, because poverty, 
famine, and disease carried them off. 

Now if, of a kingdom so well governed as France, 
and with such a good climate, remarks like these may be 
made, what shall be said of other states ? 

Paris, the 23rd of the moon of 
Rhamazan, 1718.
