Letter CV. 

TJSBEK TO THE SAME. 

All the nations of Europe are not equally submissive to 
their princes : the impatient humour of the English, for 
instance, leaves their king hardly any time to make his 
authority felt. Submission and obedience are virtues 
upon which they flatter themselves but little. On this 
subject they say most amazing things. According to 
them there is only one tie which can bind men, and that 
is gratitude : husband and wife, father and son, are only 
bound to each other by their mutual affection, or by the 
services they do each other: and these various motives of 
obligation are the origin of all kingdoms and com¬ 
munities. 

But if a prince, instead of making the lives of his sub¬ 
jects happy, attempts to oppress and ruin them, the basis 
of obedience is destroyed; nothing binds them, nothing 
attaches them to him ; and they return to their natural 
liberty. They maintain that all unlimited power must be 
unlawful, because it cannot have had a lawful origin. 
For, we cannot, say they, give to another more power 
over us than we ourselves have: now, we have not 
unlimited power over ourselves; for example, we have 
no right to take our own lives : no one upon earth then, 
they conclude, has such a power. 

The crime of high treason is nothing else, according to 
them, than the crime of the weaker against the stronger, 


LETTER CV. 


61 


simply disobedience, no matterwhat form the disobedience 
may take. Thus the people of England, finding themselves 
stronger than one of their kings , 1 pronounced it high 
treason in a prince to make war upon his subjects. They 
have therefore good reason to say that the precept of 
their Koran , 2 which requires submission to the powers 
that be, is not a very difficult one to follow, seeing that it 
is impossible not to do so, inasmuch as they are not en¬ 
joined to submit to the most virtuous, but to the 
strongest. 

The English tell how one of their kings, having con¬ 
quered and taken prisoner a prince who disputed his 
right to the crown, began to reproach him with his faith¬ 
lessness and treachery, when the unfortunate prince re¬ 
plied, “It was decided only a moment ago which of 
us two is the traitor.” 

A usurper declares all those rebels who have not, like 
him, oppressed their country; and believing that where 
there are no judges there are no laws, he causes the 
caprices of chance and fortune to be reverenced like the 
decrees of Heaven. 

Paris, the 20th of the second moon of 
Rebiab, 1717* 


1 Charles I. 


a The New Testament. 


62 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
