Letter CXV. 

Us BEK TO THE SAME. 

You ask from what cause the earth is less populous than 
it was formerly ; if you give the question good heed you 
will see that this great difference is the result of a moral 
change. 

Things are much altered since the Christian and Mo¬ 
hammedan religions divided the Roman world; these 
two religions have not been nearly so favourable to the 
propagation of the species as that of those masters of the 
world. 

In it, polygamy was prohibited ; and in that respect it 
had a great advantage over the Mohammedan religion ; 
and it had another, and no less considerable advantage 
over Christianity in that it permitted divorce. 

I find nothing so inconsistent as that plurality of wives 
permitted by the holy Koran, and the command to satisfy 
them in the same book. “Visit your wives,” said the 


LETTER CXV. 


83 


Prophet, “ because you are as necessary to them as their 
garments, and they, as necessary to you as yours.” Here 
is a precept which renders the life of a true Mussulman 
very laborious. He who has the four wives established 
by law, and only as many more concubines or slaves, 
must he not be weighed down by so many garments ? 

“ Your wives are your tilth,” the Prophet says again ; 
“devote yourselves therefore to your labour, work for the 
good of your souls; and one day you will have your 
reward.” 

I look upon a good Mussulman as an athlete, destined 
to strive without respite, but who, soon weakened and 
overcome by his first toils, languishes even in the field of 
victory, and finds himself, so to speak, buried under his 
own triumphs. 

Nature always works tardily, and, as it were, thriftily; 
her operations are never violent; even in her productions 
she requires temperance; she never works but by rule 
and measure; if she be hurried she soon falls into decline, 
and employs all her remaining strength in self-preserva¬ 
tion, losing entirely her productive faculty and productive 
power. 

It is to this state of debility that we are always reduced 
by the great number of our wives, fitter to exhaust us than 
to satisfy us. It is quite common among us to see a man 
in a very large seraglio with but few children ; the children 
themselves are for the most part weak and unhealthy, and 
share the languor of their father. 

This is not all: these women, forced to be continent, 


«4 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


require people to guard them, who must necessarily be 
eunuchs; religion,, jealousy, reason itself permit the 
approach of no others; there must be many of these 
guards, both to maintain peace within doors amid the 
endless quarrels of the women, and to prevent attempts 
from without. So that a man who has ten wives or con¬ 
cubines, must have as many eunuchs to guard them. 
But what a loss for society in this great number of men 
practically dead from their birth ! What depopulation 
must be the result! 

The female slaves, kept in the seraglio to attend along 
with the eunuchs on this great number of women, almost 
always grow old there in a sorrowful virginity; as long as 
they are there they cannot marry; and their mistresses, 
once accustomed to them, hardly ever dismiss them. 

You see how many persons of both sexes one man 
employs in his pleasures, causing them to die to the state, 
and making them useless for the propagation of the 
species. 

Constantinople and Ispahan are the capitals of the two 
greatest empires of the world; every interest should con¬ 
verge towards them, and people, attracted in a thousand 
ways, should come to them from all quarters. And yet 
these cities are themselves decaying, and will soon be 
destroyed, if their rulers do not cause to repair thither 
almost every century whole nations to repeople them. 
I will discuss this subject further in another letter. 

Paris, the 13th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1718. 


LETTER CXVI. 


85
