Letter LXIII. 

Rica to Usbek, at * * *. 

Do you mean to spend your whole life in the country ? 
At first I was to lose you only for a day or two, but now 
fifteen have passed since I last saw you. I know that you 
are living in a delightful house where the company suits 
you, where you can speculate at your ease : nothing more 
is required to make you forget the whole universe. 

For myself, my life moves on pretty much as it did 
when we were together. I go into society and try to 
understand it; my thought loses gradually all that re¬ 
mained of its Asiatic cast, and conforms without effort to 
European manners. I am no longer amazed to find in 
one house half-a-dozen women with as many men; in¬ 
deed, I begin to think it not altogether a bad idea. 

This I will say: I knew nothing of women until I 
came here; I have learnt more about them in one month 
of Paris, than I could have done in thirty years of a 
seraglio. 

With us, character is uniform, because it is constrained; 


142 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


we do not see people as they are, but as they are obliged 
to be; in that slavery of heart and mind, it is only 
fear that utters a dull routine of words, very different 
from the language of nature which expresses itself so 
variously. 

Dissimulation, that art so practised and so necessary 
with us, is here unknown: they say everything, see 
everything, and hear everything; hearts are as open as 
faces; in manners, in virtue, even in vice, one detects 
always a certain artlessness. 

In order to gratify women a talent is necessary diffe¬ 
rent from that other gift which pleases them still more ; 
it consists in a sort of playfulness of mind, which enter¬ 
tains them, as it seems to promise them every moment 
what one cannot perform except occasionally. 

This gaiety of mind naturally adapted to the dressing- 
room 1 seems to be forming the general character of the 
nation : they trifle in council, at the head of an army, 
with an ambassador. Professions appear ridiculous only 
in proportion to the professional gravity adopted: a 
doctor would be less absurd if his dress were more 
cheerful, and if, while killing his patients, he jested 
pleasantly. 

Paris, the loth of the first moon of 
Rebiab, 1714. 

1 Drawing-room we would say to-day. In the eighteenth cen¬ 
tury it was in their elegant cabinets de toilette that ladies received 
visitors. 


LETTER LXIV. 


•43
