Letter VI. 

Usbek to his friend Nessir, at Ispahan. 

At the distance of a day’s journey from Erivan we left 
Persian ground, and entered Turkish territory. Twelve 
days after, we reached Erzeroum, where we stayed three 
or four months. 

1 Rain means “the spring” in Persian. Rabi-ul-awal, “the 
first (month) of spring,” is the third of the Persian year. 


16 PERSIAN LETTERS. 

I own, Nessir, I felt sorry, though I did not show it, 
when I lost sight of Persia and found myself among the 
treacherous Osmanli. It seems to me that I become 
more and more of a pagan the further I advance into 
this heathenish country . 1 

My fatherland, my family, and my friends, came 
vividly before me ; my affections revived; and, to crown 
all, an indefinable uneasiness laid hold of me, warning 
me that I had ventured on too great an undertaking for 
my peace of mind. 

But that which afflicts me most is the memory of my 
wives. I have only to think of them to be consumed 
with grief. 

Do not imagine that I love them: insensibility in that 
matter, Nessir, has left me without desires. Living with 
so many wives, I have forestalled love—it has indeed 
been its own destruction; but from this very callousness 
there springs a secret jealousy which devours me. I 
behold a band of women left almost entirely to them¬ 
selves; except some low-minded wretches, no one is 
answerable for their conduct. I would hardly feel safe, 
if my slaves were faithful: how would it be if they were 
not so ? What doleful tidings may I not receive in those 

1 The Persians generally belong to the sect of Shiites, who con¬ 
sider Abu Bekr, Omar, and Othman, the first three successors of 
Mohammed, as usurpers, and regard Ali, the cousin and son-in-law 
of the prophet, as the first true Iman, and equal to Mohammed. The 
Shiites also reject as unworthy of credit the Sonna, a collection of 
traditions which is the canon of the faith of the Sunites, the sect to 
which the Turks belong. 


LETTER VII. 17 

far-off lands which I am about to visit! The mischief of 
this is, that my friends are unable to help me; they are 
forbidden to inquire into the sources of my misery; and 
what could they do after all ? I would prefer a thousand 
times that such faults should remain unknown because 
uncorrected, than that they should become notorious 
through some condign punishment! I unbosom myself 
to you, my dear Nessir: it is the only consolation left 
me in my misery. 

Erzeroum, the 10th of the second moon 
of Rebiab, 1711.
