LETTER XL VIII. 


105 

house of a man of some note, who delights in having 
company with him. He has a very amiable wife, who, 
along with great modesty, possesses what the secluded 
life they lead stifles in our Persian women, a charming 
gaiety. 

Stranger as I was, I had nothing better to do than to 
study the crowd of people who came and went without 
ceasing, affording me a constant change of subject for 
contemplation. I noticed at once one man, whose sim¬ 
plicity pleased me; I allied myself with him, and he with 
me, in such a manner that we were always together. 

One day, as we were talking quietly in a large company, 
leaving the general conversation to the others, I said, 
“ You will perhaps find in me more inquisitiveness than 
good manners; but I beg you to let me ask some 
questions, for I am wearied to death doing nothing, and 
of living with people with whom I have nothing in 
common. My thoughts have been busy these two days; 
there is not one among these men who has not put me to 
the torture two hundred times; in a thousand years I 
would never understand them; they are more invisible 
to me than the wives of our great king.” “You have 
only to ask,” replied he, “and I will tell you all you 
desire—the more willingly because I think you a dis¬ 
creet man, who will not abuse my confidence.” 

“ Who is that man,” said I, “ who has told us so much 
about the banquets at which he has entertained the great, 
who is so familiar with your dukes, and who talks so often 
to your ministers, who, they tell me, are so difficult of 

1. 


p 


io6 PERSIAN LETTERS. 

access? He ought surely to be a man of quality; but 
his aspect is so mean that he is hardly an honour to the 
aristocracy ; and, besides, I find him deficient in educa¬ 
tion. I am a stranger; but it seems to me that there is, 
generally speaking, a certain tone of good-breeding 
common to all nations, and I do not find it in him. Can 
it be that your upper classes are not so well trained as 
those of other nations ? ” “ That man,” answered he, 

laughing, “ is a farmer-general; he is as much above 
others in wealth, as he is inferior to us all by birth. He 
might have the best people in Paris at his table, if he 
could make up his mind never to eat in his own house. 
He is very impertinent, as you see; but he excels in his 
cook, and is not ungrateful, for you heard how he praised 
him to-day.” 

“ And that big man dressed in black,” said I, “ whom 
that lady has placed next her ? How comes he to wear a 
dress so solemn, with so jaunty an air, and such a florid 
complexion ? He smiles benignly when he is addressed; 
his attire is more modest, but not less carefully adjusted 
than that of your women.” “ That,” answered he, “ is a 
preacher, and, which is worse, a confessor. Such as he 
is, he knows more of their own affairs than the husbands; 
he is acquainted with the women’s weak side, and they 
also know his.” “ Ha!” cried I, “ he talks for ever of some¬ 
thing he calls Grace?” “No, not always,” was the reply; 
“ in the ear of a pretty woman he speaks more willingly 
of the Fall: in public, he is a son of thunder ; in private* 
as gentle as a lamb.” “ It seems to me,” said I, “ that 


LETTER XLVIII. 


107 


he receives much attention, and is held in great respect.” 
“ In great respect! Why ! he is a necessity; he is the 
sweetener of solitude; then there are little lessons, officious 
cares, set visits; he cures a headache better than any 
man in the world ; he is incomparable.” 

“ But, if I may trouble you again, tell me who that ill- 
dressed person is opposite us? He makes occasional 
grimaces, and does not speak like the others; and without 
wit enough to talk, he talks that he may have wit.” 
“ That,” answered he, “ is a poet, the grotesquest of 
human kind. These sort of people declare that they are 
born what they are ; and, I may add, what they will be 
all their lives, namely, almost always, the most ridiculous 
of men; and so nobody spares them; contempt is cast 
upon them from every quarter. Hunger has driven that 
one into this house. He is well received by its master 
and mistress, as their good nature and courtesy are 
always the same to everybody. He wrote their epitha- 
lamium when they were married, and it is the best thing 
he has done, for the marriage has been as fortunate as 
he prophesied it would be. 

“ You will not believe, perhaps,” added he, “ prepos¬ 
sessed as you are in favour of the East, that there are 
among us happy marriages, and wives whose virtue is a 
sufficient guard. This couple, here, enjoy untroubled 
peace; everybody loves and esteems them; only one 
thing is amiss: in their good nature they receive all 
kinds of people, which makes the company at their house 
sometimes not altogether unexceptionable. I, of course. 


108 PERSIAN LETTERS. 

have nothing to say against it; we must live with people 
as we find them ; those who are said to be well-bred are 
often only those who are exquisite in their vices; and 
perhaps it is with them as with poisons, the more subtle, 
the more dangerous.” 

“ And that old man,” I whispered, “ who looks so 
morose ? I took him at first for a foreigner; because, in 
addition to being dressed differently from the rest, he 
condemns everything that is done in France, and disap¬ 
proves of your government." “ He is an old soldier,” 
said he, “ who makes himself memorable to all his hearers 
by the tedious story of his exploits. He cannot endure 
the thought that France has gained any battles without him, 
nor hear a siege bragged of at which he did not mount 
the breach. He believes himself so essential to our 
history that he imagines it came to an end when he 
retired ; some wounds he has received mean, simply, the 
dissolution of the monarchy; and, unlike the philosophers 
who maintain that enjoyment is only in the present, and 
that the past is as if it had not been, he, on the contrary, 
delights in nothing but the past, and exists only in his 
old campaigns ; he breathes the air of the age that has 
gone by, just as heroes ought to live in that which is to 
come.” “ But why,” I asked, “ has he quitted the ser¬ 
vice ? ” “ He has not quitted it, but it has quitted him. 
He has been employed in a small post, where he will 
retail his adventures for the rest of his days ; but he will 
never get any further; the path of honour is closed to 
him.” “ And why ? ” asked I. “ It is a maxim in 


LETTER XL VIII. 


109 


France,” replied he, “never to advance officers whose 
patience has been worn out as subalterns; we look upon 
them as men whose minds have been narrowed by detail; 
and who, through a constant application to small things, 
are become incapable of great ones. We believe that a 
man who, at thirty, has not the qualities of a general, 
will never have them; that he, whose glance cannot 
take in at once a tract of several leagues as if from every 
point of view, who is not possessed of that presence of 
mind which in victory leaves no advantage unimproved, 
and in defeat employs every resource, will never acquire 
such capacity. Therefore we employ in brilliant services 
those great, those sublime men, on whom heaven has 
bestowed not only the courage, but the genius of the 
hero; and in inferior services those whose talents are in¬ 
ferior. Of this number are such as have grown old in 
obscure warfare; they can succeed only at what they 
have been doing all their lives; and it would be ill- 
advised to start them on fresh employment when age has 
weakened their powers.” 

A moment after, curiosity again seized me, and I said, 
“ I promise not to ask another question if you will only 
answer this one. Who is that tall young man who wears 
his own hair, and has more impertinence than wit? How 
comes it that he speaks louder than the others, and is so 
charmed with himself for being in the world ? ” “ That is 
a great lady-killer,” he replied. With these words some 
people entered, others left, and all rose. Someone came 
to speak to my acquaintance, and I remained in my 


110 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


ignorance. But shortly after, I know not by what chance, 
the young man in question found himself beside me, and 
began to talk. “ It is fine weather,” he said. “ Will you 
take a turn with me in the garden ? ” I replied as civilly 
as I could, and we went out together. “ I have come to 
the country,” said he, “to please the mistress of the 
house, with whom I am not on the worst of terms. 
There is a certain woman in the world who will be rather 
out of humour; but what can one do ? I visit the finest 
women in Paris; but I do not confine my attentions to 
one; they have plenty to do to look after me, for, between 
you and me, I am a sad dog.” “In that case, sir,” said 
I, “ you doubtless have some office or employment which 
prevents you from waiting on them more assiduously ? ” 
“No, sir; I have no other business than to provoke 
husbands, and drive fathers to despair; I delight in 
alarming a woman who thinks me hers, and in bringing 
her within an ace of losing me. A set of us young fellows 
divide up Paris among us in this pursuit, and keep it 
wondering at everything we do.” “ From what I under¬ 
stand,” said I, “you make more stir than the most 
valorous warrior, and are more regarded than a grave 
magistrate. If you were in Persia, you would not enjoy 
all these advantages; you would be held fitter to guard 
our women than to please them.” The blood mounted 
to my face; and I believe, had I gone on speaking, I 
could not have refrained from affronting him. 

What say you to a country where such people are 
tolerated, and where a man who follows such a profession 


LETTER XLIX. 


in 


is allowed to live ? Where faithlessness, treachery, rape, 
deceit, and injustice lead to distinction? Where a man 
is esteemed because he has bereaved a father of his 
daughter, a husband of his wife, and distresses the 
happiest and purest homes ? Happy the children of Hali 
who protect their families from outrage and seduction ! 
Heaven’s light is not purer than the fire that burns in the 
hearts of our wives ; our daughters think only with dread 
of the day when they will be deprived of that purity, in 
virtue of which they rank with the angels and the spiritual 
powers. My beloved land, on which the morning sun 
looks first, thou art unsoiled by those horrible crimes 
which compel that star to hide his beams as he approaches 
the dark West! 

Paris, the 5th of the moon of 
Rhamazan, 1713.
