Letter XL VIL 

Zachi to Usbek, at Paris. 

I have great news for you. Zephis and I are reconciled, 
and the seraglio, which had taken sides in our quarrel, is 
reunited. I need nothing now in this abode of peace 
but you. Come, my dear Usbek, come to me, and let 
love be triumphant. 

I made a great feast in honour of Zephis, to which 
your mother, your wives, and your principal concubines 
were invited ; your aunts and some of your female cousins 
also came; they arrived on horseback, covered by the 
dark cloud of their veils and garments. 

Next day we set out for the country, where we hope to 
have greater liberty. We mounted our camels, four in 
each palanquin. As the party had been improvised, we 
had not time to send round the courouc, x but the chief 
eunuch, always attentive, took another precaution : to 
the cloth which hid us from sight, he attached a curtain 
so thick, that we could positively see nobody. 

1 Courouc (back ! back I) is the cry of the eunuchs who accom¬ 
pany the women’s litters. 


LETTER XL VII. 


»°3 


When we reached that river which we have to cross, 
each of us went, in the usual way, into a box which was 
transported in the ferry boat; for we were told that there 
were a great many people on the river. One inquisitive 
person who approached too near the place where we were 
shut up, received a mortal blow, which cut him off for 
ever from the light of day ; another, who was found bath- 
ing naked on the bank, met the same fate: those two 
wretches were sacrificed by your faithful eunuchs to your 
honour and to ours. 

But listen to the rest of our adventures. When we had 
reached the middle of the river, so violent a wind arose, 
and such a dense cloud covered the sky, that our sailors 
began to lose hope. Terrified at the danger, we nearly 
all swooned away. I remember that I heard the voices 
of our eunuchs in dispute. Some of them said that, to 
save us from danger, we must be set at liberty; but their 
chief insisted, unfalteringly, that he would sooner die 
than permit his master to be so dishonoured, and that he 
would plunge a dagger into the breast of anyone who 
should dare to make such proposals. One of my slaves, 
quite beside herself and all undressed, came running to 
my assistance ; but a black eunuch seized her brutally, 
and thrust her back whence she had come. Then I 
swooned away, and returned to myself only after the 
danger was past. 

How distressing journeys are for us poor women ! 
Men are exposed only to those dangers which threaten 
their lives; but we are in constant terror of losing either 


104 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


life or virtue. Farewell, my dear Usbek, whom I shall 
always adore. 

The Seraglio at Fatme, the 2nd of the 
moon of Rhamazan, 1713. 


Letter XL VLLL. 

Usbek to Rhedi, at Venice. 

Those who take pleasure in their own instruction are 
never idle. Although I am not employed on any busi¬ 
ness of importance, I am yet constantly occupied. I 
spend my time observing, and at night I write down what 
I have noticed, what I have seen, what I have heard, 
during the day. I am interested in everything, astonished 
at everything: I am like a child, whose organs, still over¬ 
sensitive, are vividly impressed by the merest trifles . 1 

You would scarcely believe it, but we have been well 
received in all circles, and among all classes. This is 
largely owing to the quick wit and natural gaiety of Rica, 
which lead him to seek out everybody, and make him 
equally sought after. Our foreign aspect offends nobody; 
indeed, we are delighted at the surprise which people show 
on finding us not altogether without manners; for the 
French imagine that men are not among the products of 
our country. Nevertheless, I must admit that they are 
well worth undeceiving. 

I spent some days in the country near Paris at the 
1 Montesquieu describes himself in this passage.
