Letter LX. 

USBEK TO IBBEN, AT SMYRNA. 

You ask me if there are Jews in France. Know that 
wherever there is money, there are Jews. You ask me 
what they do. Exactly what they do in Persia : nothing 
is liker an Asiatic Jew, than a European one. 

They exhibit among the Christians, as among our¬ 
selves, an invincible attachment to their religion, amount¬ 
ing to folly. 

The Jewish religion is like the trunk of an old tree 
which has produced two branches that cover the whole 
earth—I mean Mohammedanism and Christianity: or 
rather, she is the mother of two daughters that have 
loaded her with a thousand bruises ; 1 for, in religious 
matters, the nearest relations are the bitterest foes. But 
however badly her daughters have treated her, she ceases 
not to glory in having brought them forth : she has made 
use of both of them to encircle the whole earth, just as 
her venerable age embraces all time. 

The Jews therefore regard themselves as the fountain 
of all holiness, the source of all religion: us they look 
upon as heretics who have changed the law, or rather as 
rebel Jews. 

If the change had been made gradually, they imagine 

1 Voltaire, in his article on the Jews in the “ Philosophical Dic¬ 
tionary,” has reproduced this idea of Montesquieu’s without acknow¬ 
ledging it. 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


136 

that they might have been easily led away; but as it 
took place suddenly, and with violence, and as they can 
mark the day and the hour of the birth of both daughters, 
they mock at religions that have had beginnings, and 
cling to one that is older than the world itself. 

They have never been freer from molestation in Europe 
than they are now. Christians are beginning to lose the 
spirit of intolerance which animated them: experience 
has shown the error of the expulsion of the Jews from 
Spain, and of the persecution of those Christians in 
France whose belief differed a little from that of the king. 
They have realized that zeal for the advancement of re¬ 
ligion is different from a due attachment to it; and that 
in order to love it and fulfil its behests, it is not neces¬ 
sary to hate and persecute those who are opposed to it. 

It is much to be desired that our Mussulmans re¬ 
garded this matter as rationally as the Christians, and 
that peace were established in all good faith between 
Hali and Abubeker , 1 leaving God to decide the merits 
of these holy prophets. I would have them honoured 
by acts of veneration and respect, and not by foolish 
preferences. Let us seek to merit their favour, whatever 
place God has given them; whether it be at His right 
hand, or beneath the footstool of His throne. 

Paris, the 18th of the moon of Saphar, 1714. 

1 Abu Bekr, father-in-law of Mohammed, was proclaimed Caliph 
on the death of the prophet, in 632. According to the Persians, this 
nomination was a usurpation of the rights of Ali, the cousin and 
son-in-law of Mohammed. (See Note, p. 16.) 


LETTER LXI. 


1 37
