Letter CXVI. 

USBEK TO THE SAME. 

The Romans did not have fewer slaves than we; they 
had indeed more, but they made a better use of them. 

Far from preventing by violent measures the multipli¬ 
cation of their slaves, they, on the contrary, favoured it to 
the best of their ability; they united them in marriages, 
of a kind, as much as they could; by this means they 
filled their houses with servants of both sexes and all 
ages; and the state with a countless people. 

Children which in time became the wealth of a master 
were bom around him without number; he alone was 
responsible for their upbringing and education; the 
fathers, freed from that burden, followed only the inclina¬ 
tion of nature, and multiplied without the fear of too large 
a family. 

I have told you that among us all the slaves are 
employed in guarding our wives, and in nothing else; 
that with regard to the state they are in a perpetual 
lethargy; with the result that industry and agriculture are 
necessarily confined to a few freemen and heads of 
families, who apply themselves as little as possible. 

It was not thus among the Romans. The republic 
made use of this nation of slaves to its own great benefit. 
Each had his own savings, which he owned on conditions 
imposed by his master; and this hoard he employed in 
whatever direction his talent lay. One became a banker; 


86 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


another trafficked in cargoes ; this one took to retail deal¬ 
ing ; that one applied himself to some industry, or took to 
farming and cultivated the soil; there was not one of them 
who did not give himself with all his might to increase 
his savings, securing for himself in the meantime comfort 
in his present slavery, and the hope of future liberty; 
this made a diligent people and encouraged arts and 
industry. 

These slaves, enriched by their thrift and toil, bought 
their freedom and became citizens. The republic was 
continually built up, and received into its bosom new 
families, in proportion as the old ones decayed. 

In my future letters I shall perhaps take the oppor¬ 
tunity to prove to you that the more men there are in a 
state, the more prosperous is its commerce ; I shall prove 
as easily, that as commerce flourishes, men increase; these 
two things necessarily aid and abet each other. 

Since that is so, how much must this enormous number 
of slaves, always busy, have grown and increased? In¬ 
dustry and plenty produced them ; and they on their side 
produced plenty and industry. 

Paris, the 16th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1718. 


LETTER CXVI1. 


87
