Letter LXXV. 

USBEK TO RHEDI, AT VENICE. 

I must confess that I have not noticed in the Christians 
that lively faith in their religion which prevails among 
Mussulmans. With them there is a vast difference be¬ 
tween profession and belief, between belief and convic¬ 
tion, between conviction and practice. Religion is not 
so much a matter of holiness as it is the subject of a de- 


174 


PERSIAN LETTERS 


bate, in which everybody has a right to join. Courtiers, 
warriors, women even, array themselves against the eccle¬ 
siastics, and insist upon their proving what they have 
made up their minds not to believe. Not that, willing to 
be guided by reason, they have taken the trouble to 
examine the falseness of that religion which they reject: 
they are rebels who have felt the yoke, and have shaken 
it off before knowing what it is. Nor are they any securer 
in their incredulity than in their faith : their life is a con¬ 
stant ebb and flow between belief and unbelief . 1 One of 
them said to me once, “ I believe in the immortality of 
the soul for six months at a time; my opinions depend 
entirely upon my bodily condition : I am a Spinozist, a 
Socinian, a Catholic, ungodly or devout, according to the 
state of my animal spirits, the quality of my digestion, 
the rarity or heaviness of the air I breathe, the lightness 
or solidity of the food I eat. When the doctor is at my 
bedside, the confessor has me at a disadvantage. I know 
very well how to prevent religion from annoying me when 
I am in good health; but I allow myself to be consoled 
by it when I am ill: when I have nothing more to hope 
for here below, religion offers itself, and gains me by its 
promises; I am glad to give myself up to it, and to die 
with hope on my side.” 


1 “ All we have gained then by our unbelief 
Is a life of doubt diversified by faith. 

For one of faith diversified by doubt : 

We called the chessboard white,—we call it black.” 

Browning. 


I 


LETTER LXXV. 


•75 


A long time ago the Christian princes enfranchised all 
the slaves in their dominions; because, said they, Chris¬ 
tianity makes all men equal. It is true that this religious 
action was of great service to them, for by its means they 
diminished the power which the great lords exercised 
over the lower classes. Afterwards, having made con¬ 
quests in countries where they found it to their advantage 
to keep slaves , 1 they permitted them to be bought and 
sold, forgetting that religious principle which had moved 
them so strongly. What can one say? Truth at one 
time, error at another. Why should we not do like the 
Christians? We were very simple-minded to reject settle¬ 
ments and easy conquests in pleasant climates , 2 because 
we could not find water pure enough to wash us accord¬ 
ing to the principles of our holy Koran. I give thanks 
to Almighty God, who sent his great prophet Hali, 
whence it is that I profess a religion which requires to be 
preferred before all human interests, and which is as pure 
as the sky from which it came. 

Paris, the 13th of the moon of 
Saphar, 1715. 

1 The French colonies. 

1 The Mohammedans had no wish to take Venice because they 
could not obtain water there suitable for their purifications.—(M.) 



CHISWICK PRESS:—c. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT, 
CHANCERY LANE. 








PQ 2011 .L5 v.l 

MONTESQUIEU, CRarles 
Persian letters... 



THE MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE 
1761 N STREET, N.W. 
WASHINGTON, D C. 20036
