Letter CXLIII. 

Rica to Nathaniel Levi, Jewish Physician at 
Leghorn. 

You ask me what I think of the virtues of amulets, and 
the power of talismans. Why do you address yourself to 
me? You are a Jew and I am a Mohammedan, that is 
to say, two very superstitious people. 

I carry about with me always two thousand passages 
from the holy Koran: on my arms I fasten a little slip 
on which are written the names of more than two hundred 
dervishes : the names of Hali, of Fatima, and of all the 
saintliest ones, are hidden in my clothes in more than 
twenty places. 

However, I do not disapprove of those who refuse to 
believe in the power ascribed to certain words. We find 
it more difficult to reply to their arguments, than they to 
our experience. I carry about me all these sacred scraps 
through long habit, and in order to conform to a uni¬ 
versal practice : I am certain that if they do not possess 
more virtue than the rings and other ornaments with 

1 A decree of the 15 th September 1720. 


i6o PERSIAN LETTERS. 

which we deck ourselves, they have at least as much. 
You, on the other hand, place your entire confidence in 
some mysterious letters; and without that safeguard would 
be in perpetual dread. 

Men are most unfortunate beings. They hover con¬ 
stantly between false hopes and ridiculous fears: and 
instead of relying on reason, make themselves monsters 
to terrify them, or phantoms to mislead them. 

What effect do you think can be produced by an 
arrangement of certain letters? What evil effect can 
their derangement produce? What connection have 
they with the winds that they should calm tempests; 
with gunpowder, that they should overcome its force; 
with peccant humours, as doctors call them, and the 
morbific cause of diseases, that they should cure them ? 

What is most extraordinary, is, that those who tire 
out their minds endeavouring to show the connection 
between certain events and occult powers, are forced to 
take as much trouble again to keep themselves from per¬ 
ceiving the true cause. 

You will tell me that a battle was gained by means of 
certain spells; whereas I hold that you must be blind, 
not to see that the situation of the field, the number or 
courage of the soldiers, the experience of the captains, 
are sufficient to produce that effect, of which you wilfully 
ignore the true cause. 

I will grant for a moment that spells may exist: grant 
in your turn, for a moment, that they may not; which is 
far from impossible. What you grant me will not prevent 


LETTER CXLIII. 


161 

two armies from encountering each other in battle: 
would you hold in that case that neither could defeat the 
other ? 

Do you believe that the battle will remain dubious 
until an invisible power comes to decide it ? that every 
blow will be thrown away; all strategy in vain; and all 
courage useless? 

Do you imagine that death, present on such occasions 
in a thousand forms, cannot produce in the minds of 
men those wild panics which you have such difficulty in 
explaining? Will you have it that in an army of a 
hundred thousand men there may not be a single coward ? 
Do you think that the discouragement of such a one may 
not produce discouragement in another ? that the second 
influencing a third, would soon make him produce a 
like effect upon a fourth? No more would be neces¬ 
sary to cause a whole army to be suddenly seized with 
despair, and the larger the army, the more sudden the 
seizure. 

The whole world knows and feels that men, like all 
creatures actuated by self-preservation, are passionately 
attached to life: this is known to be the general rule; 
and yet people ask why on a particular occasion, they 
should fear to lose it. 

Although the holy writings of all nations abound with 
accounts of these wild and supernatural panics, I can 
imagine nothing more ridiculous; because, to be certain 
that an effect which may be produced in a hundred thou¬ 
sand natural ways is supernatural, would require first of all 


ii. 


Y 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


162 

proof positive that none of these causes had operated; 
which is impossible. 

But I shall say no more about it, Nathaniel; it seems 
to me that it is not a subject deserving such serious treat¬ 
ment. 

Paris, the 20th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1720. 

P.S.—As I was concluding, I heard them crying in the 
streets a letter from a country physician to one in Paris 
(for here every trifle is printed, published, and bought). 
I believe it is worth while sending it to you because it has 
some bearing on our subject. 

Letter from a Country Physician to a 
Physician of Paris. 

“ There was once in our town a sick person who had 
had no sleep for thirty-five days. His physician ordered 
him opium ; but he could not make up his mind to take 
it, and when he had the cup in his hand he was less 
inclined than ever. At last, he said to his physician, 

‘ Sir, give me only till to-morrow: I know a man who, 
although he does not practise medicine, has in his house 
an immense number of cures for insomnia; let me send 
for him: and if I do not sleep to-night, I promise to re¬ 
turn to you. 1 The physician being dismissed, the sick 
man had his curtains closed, and said to his page, ‘ Go to 
M. Anis and ask him to come to me.’ When M. Anis 
came the patient said to him, ‘ My dear sir, I am dying; 


LETTER CXLIIL 


163 


I can’t sleep: have you not in your shop the C. of the G., 1 
or some other book of devotion written by an R. P. J., 2 
which you have not been able to sell, for long-kept 
remedies are often the best ? ’ ‘ Sir,’ replied the bookseller, 
‘1 have the Holy Court of Father Caussin, 3 in six volumes, 
at your service ; I will send it to you ; and I hope you 
will be the better of it. If you would prefer the works of 
the reverend Father Rodrigo, a Spanish Jesuit, you need 
not want them. But, believe me, you had better stick to 
Father Caussin; I trust, with the help of God, that a 
single sentence of Father Caussin’s will do you more good 
than a whole page of the C. of the G.’ With that M. Anis 
left, and went to his shop to get the remedy. The Holy 
Court arrived; and the dust having been shaken off it, the 
son of the sick man, a schoolboy, began to read it: he 
was the first to feel its effects ; at the second page, his 
utterance began to be almost inarticulate, and already the 
whole company was growing drowsy; in a moment, 
everybody was snoring except the sick man, who, after 
having stood it a good while, was at last overcome, too. 

“The physician arrived early next'morning. ‘Well,’ 
he said, * has my opiate been taken ? ’ Nobody answered 
him: the sick man’s wife, daughter, and little boy, radiant 
with joy, showed him Father Caussin. He asked what it 
was. They answered, ‘ Long life to Father Caussin; we 

1 “ La Connaissance du Globe" according to the early editors. 

a Reverend plre Jlsuite. 

3 A Jesuit, bom at Troyes. He was the confessor of Louis 
XIII., and was exiled by Richelieu. 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


164 

must send him to be bound. Who would have said it ? 
Who would have thought it ? It is a miracle. Look, sir, 
look ! here is Father Caussin; it is this book which has 
given my father sleep.’ And thereupon they explained 
the matter to him as it had happened. 

“ The physician was a skilful man, versed in the mys¬ 
teries of the Cabala, and in the power of words and 
spirits. He was much struck, and, after deep thought, 
resolved to change his practice entirely. ‘ Here is indeed 
a notable fact!’ said he. ‘It is a new experience; and 
I must experiment further. And why should a spirit not 
be able to transmit to its work the same qualities which 
itself possesses ? Do we not see it every day ? At least it 
is well worth the trying. I am tired of the apothecaries; 
their syrups, their juleps, and all their galenical drugs 
destroy the health and the lives of their patients. Let us 
change the method, and try the power of the spirits.’ 
With this idea, he drafted a new system of pharmacy, as 
you will see by the description which I am about to give 
you of the principal remedies which he employed. 

“ A Light Purgative. 

“Take three leaves of Aristotle’s logic in Greek; two 
leaves of a treatise on scholastic theology, the keener the 
better, as, for example, that of the subtle Scotus; four of 
Paracelsus; one of Avicenna ; six of Averroes; three of 
Porphyry; as many of Plotinus, and as many of Jamblicus. 
Infuse the whole for twenty-four hours, and take four 
doses a day. 


LETTER CXLIIT. 


165 


“ A Stronger Purgative. 

“ Take ten A # # # of the C # # #, concerning the 
B m * * and the C * * * of the I * * *; 1 distil them 
in a water-bath; dilute a drop of the bitter and pungent 
product in a glass of common water; swallow the whole 
with confidence. 


"An Emetic. 

“ Take six harangues; any dozen funeral orations, care¬ 
fully excepting those of M. of N.; 2 a collection of new 
operas; fifty novels; thirty new memoirs. Put the whole 
in a large flask; leave it to settle for two days; then 
distil it on a sand-bath. And if all this should be insuffi¬ 
cient, here is, 


“ Another More Powerful Emetic. 

“ Take a leaf of marbled paper which has served as 
cover to a collection of the pieces of the J. F.; 3 infuse it 
for three minutes; warm a spoonful of the infusion, and 
drink it off. 

1 Ten Decrees (Arrets) of the Council, concerning the Bank and 
the Company of the Indies; or, according to the earlier editors, 
concerning the Bull and the Constitution of the Jesuits. 

2 Flechier, Bishop of Nimes (Monsieur de Nimes). 

3 The “ Jeux Floraux,” established in 1324 by the magistrates of 
Toulouse to revive the decaying art of the troubadours. 


166 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


“ A Very Simple Cure for Asthma. 

“Read all the works of the reverend Father Maimbourg, 1 
formerly a Jesuit, taking care to pause only at the end of 
each sentence; and you will gradually find your power of 
breathing return to you so completely, that you will have 
no need to repeat the cure. 

“ An Antidote for the Itch, Rashes, Scald-head, 
and Farcy. 

“ Take three of Aristotle’s categories, two metaphysical 
degrees, one distinction, six lines of Chapelain, one phrase 
from the letters of the Abb£ of Saint-Cyran; write them 
all on a piece of paper, fold it up, tie it to a ribbon, and 
carry it round your neck. 

“ Miraculum chymicum, de violenta fermentatione, cum 
fumo, igne, et flamma. 

“Misce Quesnellianam infusionem, cum infusione Lalle- 
maniand; fiat fermentatio cum magna vi, impetu et tonitru, 
acidio pugnantibus, et invicem penetrantibus alcalinos sales ; 
fiet evaporatio ardentium spiritium. Pone liquorem fer- 
mentatum in alembico ; nihil inde extrahes,et nihil invenies, 
nisi caput mortuum. 

1 Louis Maimbourg, expelled from the Company of Jesus in 1685 
for having defended the liberties of the Gallican Church in his 
“Traite historique de l’Eglise de Rome.” 


LETTER CXLIII. 


167 


“ Lenitivum. 

“Recipe Molina, anodine chartas duas; Escobarisrelaxativi 
paginas sex ; Vasquii emollientis folium unum ; infunde in 
aqua communis lib. iiij. Ad consumptionem dimidice partis 
colentur et exprimantur ; et, in expressions, dissolve Bauni 
detersivi et Tamburini abluentis folia iij. 

“ Fiat clister. 


“ In chlorosim quam vulgus pallidos-colores, aut febrim 
amatoriam appellat. 

“ Recipe Aretini figuras iiij.; F. Thomce Sanchii de 
matrimonis folia ij. 

‘ 1 Infuditur in aquce com?nunis libras quinque. 

“ Fiat ptisana aperiensl 

1 “ A marvel in chemistry, concerning a violent fermentation, 
accompanied with smoke, heat, and flame. Mingle an infusion of 
Quesnel* with one of Lallemand; f let fermentation proceed with 
much violence, energy, and noise, as the acids fight together, and eat 
their way into each other's alkaline salts; £ the fiery spirits will 
thus evaporate. When fermentation is over, put the liquid in an 
alembic: you will get nothing out of it, and find nothing left in it, 
but a caput mortuum.—A Gentle Aperient. Take two papers of 
Molina as pain-killer; of Escobar, to keep the bowels open, take six 
pages ; take of Vasquez, to keep the passage easy, one leaf; infuse in 
four pounds of common water. When half has evaporated, strain 


* A Jansenist, and great opponent of the Jesuits. 

+ A Jesuit father. 

$ A pun in the original; “ sales ” meaning also “ witticisms.” 



168 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


“These are the drugs which our physician prescribed 
with remarkable success. ‘ He did not wish,’ he said, 
‘ lest he should kill his patients, to employ rare reme¬ 
dies, and such as are difficult to find—for example, a 
dedicatory epistle which had never made anybody yawn ; 
too short a preface; a bishop’s charge written by himself; 
and the work of a Jansenist despised by a Jansenist, or 
else admired by a Jesuit.’ He held that remedies of that 
kind were only fit to maintain quackery, to which he had 
an insurmountable antipathy.” 

and squeeze; and, while squeezing, dissolve in the mixture three 
leaves of Baun to act as detergent, and three of Tamburini* to 
wash away impurities. Make a clyster of the result .—A cure for 
chlorosis, vulgarly called the green-sickness, or hot fit of love. 
Take four plates from Aretinus ; take of Thomas Sanchez' work on 
Marriage, two leaves. Infuse them in five pounds of common water, 
and you will have a pleasant aperient. ” 


* Molina, Escobar, Vasquez, Bauni, and Tamburini were Jesuits 
who replied to the attacks of the Jansenists. Their names are 
frequently mentioned in Pascal’s “Provincials.” The name of 
Escobar makes at least one appearance in English literature: 

“ Now, they prick pins at a tissue 
Fine as a skein of the casuist Escobar’s 
Worked on the bone of a lie.” 

Browning’s Master Hugues of Saxe-Gotha.
