Letter XCVIII. 

USBEK TO HASSIM, DERVISH OF THE MOUNTAIN OF 
Jaron. 

Oh, wise dervish! whose inquisitive mind excels in learn¬ 
ing, give ear to what I am about to tell you. 

There are philosophers here, who, it is true, have not 
attained to the perfection of oriental wisdom : they have 
not been carried up to the throne of light: neither have 
they heard the unutterable words, nor felt the awful 
approach of divine frenzy; but left to themselves, and 
deprived of these sacred miracles, they follow silently the 
footprints of human reason. 

You would not believe how far this guide has led them. 
They have cleared up chaos, and have explained, by a 
simple mechanism, the order of divine architecture. 
The creator of nature gave motion to matter: nothing 
more was required to produce the prodigious variety of 
effects in the universe. 

Ordinary law-givers offer us laws to regulate society— 


4 6 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


laws, subject to change like the minds of those who make 
them, and of the people who obey them: those talk only 
of general, immutable, and eternal laws, which, without 
exception, are obeyed with order, regularity, and absolute 
exactness in the immensity of space. 

And what think you, most holy man, these laws may 
be ? You imagine, perhaps, that entering into the coun¬ 
sels of the Eternal, you are about to be astonished by 
sublime mysteries: you give up in advance all idea of 
understanding, and propose only to admire. 

But you will soon change your opinion: they do not 
dazzle us by a pretended profundity: their simplicity has 
made them long misunderstood; and it is only after 
much reflection, that people have seen how fruitful they 
are, and how far they reach. 

The first is, that every body tends to describe a straight 
line, unless it meets with some obstacle which diverts 
its course; and the second, which is but a consequence 
of the first, is, that every body which moves round a 
centre, tends to fly from it; because the further off it 
is, the nearer the course it describes approaches a 
straight line. 

Here, sublime dervish, you have the key of nature: 
here are the fruitful principles, from which consequences 
are drawn which pass beyond our ken. 

' The knowledge of five or six truths has filled their 
philosophy with wonders, and has enabled them to per¬ 
form almost as many prodigies and marvels as those which 
are told of our holy prophets. 


LETTER XCVIII. 


47 


For, in short, I am persuaded that we have no doctor 
who would not have been sorely troubled, if he had been 
told to weigh in a balance all the air which surrounds the 
earth, or to measure all the water which falls each year 
upon its surface; and who would not have thought many 
times before telling how many leagues sound travels in an 
hour; what time a ray of light occupies in journeying 
from the sun to us; how many fathoms it is from here to 
Saturn; or according to what curve a ship should be cut 
to make it the best sailer possible. 

Perhaps if some holy man had adorned the works of 
these philosophers with lofty and sublime expressions; 
if he had introduced bold figures and mysterious alle¬ 
gories, he might have made a great work, which would 
have ranked next to the Koran. 

However, if I must tell you what I think, I never cared 
greatly for the figurative style. In our Koran there are 
a great number of trifles which always appear to me as 
such, although they receive distinction from the strength 
and liveliness of the style. At first these inspired books 
seemed to be only divine ideas stated in the language of 
mankind: on the contrary, however, one often finds in 
the Koran the language of God and the ideas of men; as 
if by some astonishing caprice, God had dictated the 
words, and man had supplied the thought. 

You will say, perhaps, that I speak too freely of that 
which is held most sacred among us; regard it as the 
outcome of the independence which distinguishes this 
country. No; thanks to Heaven, my mind has not 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


43 

corrupted my heart, and while I live Hali shall be my 
prophet. 

Paris, the 15th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1716.
