Letter CXIV. 

Usbek to Rhedi, at Venice. 

The earth, my dear Rhedi, is not incorruptible; even 
the heavens are not: astronomers are eye-witnesses of 
their changes, which are the perfectly natural effects of 
the universal motion of matter. 


8o 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


The earth is subject, like the other planets, to the laws 
of motion ; it suffers within itself a continual strife among 
its elements ; the sea and the land seem to be for ever at 
war; each moment produces new combinations. 

Men, in an abode so subject to change, are likewise in 
an unsettled condition : a hundred thousand causes may 
operate against them capable of destroying them, and 
much more of increasing or diminishing their number. 

I do not refer to those special catastrophes, so common 
in history, which have destroyed whole cities and king¬ 
doms : there are general ones which many a time have 
brought the human race next door to destruction. 

History is full of those universal plagues which have 
one after the other desolated the earth. They tell of one 
which was so violent that it blasted the very roots of 
plants, and made itself felt throughout the known world, 
as far as the empire of China; one degree more of cor¬ 
ruption would have destroyed, perhaps in a single day, the 
whole human race. 

It is not two centuries since the most shameful of all 
diseases overran Europe, Asia, and Africa; in a very 
short time it worked terrible havoc; had it continued its 
progress with unchanging fury, it would have destroyed 
the race. Burdened with disease from their birth, and 
incapable of sustaining the duties of society, men would 
have perished miserably. 

How would it have been, had the poison possessed a 
little more strength, as it would certainly have done, if, 
fortunately, there had not been found a remedy as power- 


LETTER CXIV. 


81 


ful as any yet discovered ! 1 Perhaps that disease, which 
attacks the organs of generation, would have ended by 
attacking generation itself. 

But why do I talk of destruction that might have 
happened to the whole human race ? Has it not already 
taken place ? Did not the Flood reduce mankind to one 
single family ? 

There are philosophers who distinguish two creations : 
that of things, and that of man. They cannot believe 
that matter and created things have been in existence 
only six thousand years; that during all eternity God 
delayed His works, and only yesterday began to use His 
creative power. Was it because He could not, or because 
He would not ? But if He could not at one time, neither 
could He at another. It is then because He would not; 
but, as time does not exist for God, if it is granted that 
He willed a thing once, He willed it always, and from 
the beginning. 

However, all historians speak of a first father: they 
show us the origin of human nature. Is it not natural 
to suppose that Adam was saved from some general 
calamity, as Noah was, from the Flood; and that such 
great events have been of frequent occurrence since the 
creation of the world? But all destructions have not 
been violent. We see many parts of the earth tired out 
with providing subsistence for men; how do we know 
that the whole earfh has not within itself general causes 
of debility, slow-working and imperceptible ? 

1 Mercury. 


II. 


M 


82 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


It has been a satisfaction to me to give you these 
general ideas before replying more particularly to your 
letter on the decrease of mankind which has been going 
on for seventeen or eighteen centuries. I will show you 
in a succeeding letter, that moral causes, independently 
of physical ones, have produced this effect. 

Paris, the 8th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1718.
