Letter LXXXI . 1 

Usbek to Rhedi, at Venice. 

Since I have been in Europe, my dear Rhedi, I have 
seen many forms of government. It is not here as 
in Asia, where the rules of policy are everywhere the 
same. 

I have often inquired which form of government is 
most conformable to reason. It seems to me that the 
most perfect is that which attains its object with the least 
friction ; so that the government which leads men by 
following their propensities and inclinations is the most 
perfect. 

If under a mild government the people are as submis¬ 
sive as under a severe one, the former is to be preferred, 

1 This letter contains much that Montesquieu developed after¬ 
wards in his “ Esprit des Lois.” 





THE', CIRCASSIAN SLAVE'. 
















LETTER LjTXXI. 13 

since it is more rational, severity being a motive foreign to 
reason. 

Remember, my dear Rhedi, that obedience to the 
laws in a state is not measured by the degree of cruelty 
in the punishments. In countries where penalties are 
moderate, they are dreaded as much as in those where 
they are atrocious and tyrannical. 

Whether a government be mild or cruel, there must 
be degrees of punishment; the gravity of the chastise¬ 
ment must always be in proportion to the gravity of the 
crime. Our imagination adapts itself to the customs of 
the country in which we live. Eight days’ imprisonment, 
or a lighter punishment, has a greater effect on the mind 
of a European brought up in a mild-mannered country, 
than the loss of an arm has upon an Asiatic. A certain 
degree of dread attaches to a certain degree of punish¬ 
ment, and each feels it in his own way: a punishment 
which would not rob a Turk of a single quarter of an 
hour’s sleep, would overwhelm a Frenchman with infamy 
and despair. 

Besides, I do not see that police regulations, justice, 
and equity, are better observed in Turkey, in Persia, or 
in the dominions of the Mogul, than in the Republics of 
Holland, and of Venice, and even in England: it does 
not appear that fewer crimes are committed there, and 
that men, intimidated by the greatness of the punish¬ 
ments, are more obedient to the Jaws. 

On the contrary, I note a source of injustice and vexa¬ 
tion in the midst of these very states. 


'4 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


I find even the prince, who is himself the law, less 
master there than anywhere else. 

I observe that, at times when severe punishments are 
inflicted, there are always tumults, which nobody com¬ 
mands, and that, when once authority depending upon 
violence is set at nought, there remains with no one 
sufficient power to restore it; 

That the certainty of punishment itself strengthens 
and increases the disorder; 

That in these states a petty revolt never takes place; 
and that an uprising follows the first murmur of sedition 
without a moment’s interval; 

That in them great events are not necessarily prepared 
by great causes : on the contrary, the least accident pro¬ 
duces a great revolution, often as unforeseen by those 
who cause it as by those who suffer from it. 

When Osman, Emperor of the Turks, was deposed, 1 
none of those who committed that crime had any inten¬ 
tion of doing so: they simply asked, as suppliants, that 
justice should be done for some wrong: a voice, which 
no one knew, issued from the crowd by chance; it pro¬ 
nounced the name of Mustapha, and suddenly Mustapha 
was Emperor. 

Paris, the 2nd of the first moon of 
Rebiab, 1715. 


1 In 1622. 


LETTER LXXXII. 


IS
