Letter CXXXV. 

Rica to the Same. 

I returned at the appointed time; and my friend led 
me to the very spot we had left. “ Here,” he said, “ are 
the grammarians, the glossers, and the commentators.” 
“ Father,” said I, “ have not all these people been able 
to dispense with common sense ? ” “ Yes,” said he, 
“ they have; and yet it does not appear, and their 
works are not a penny the worse, which is very con¬ 
venient for them.” “ True,” said I; “ and I know plenty 
of philosophers who would do well to occupy themselves 
with sciences of this kind.” 

“ There,” continued he, “ are the orators who can 
convince people without employing reason ; and the 

s 


11. 


13 ° 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


geometers, who compel a man to be convinced in spite 
of himself, and conquer him by sheer force. 

“ Here are metaphysical books, which deal with very 
lofty concerns indeed, and in which the infinite meets 
one at every turning; books of physics, which detect 
nothing more marvellous in the economy of the vast 
universe, than in the simplest machine of our craftsmen. 

“ Books of medicine, those monuments of the frailty 
of nature and of the power of art, which when they 
treat even of the slightest disorders make us tremble by 
bringing the idea of death home to us; but which when 
they discuss the power of remedies make us feel as 
secure as if we were immortal. 

“ Near these are the books of anatomy, which do not 
so much contain descriptions of the parts of the human 
body, as the barbarous names which have been given 
them—neither likely to cure the patient of his disease 
nor the physician of his ignorance. 

“ Here are the alchemists, who inhabit now the hos¬ 
pital, now the madhouse, dwellings equally suitable for 
them. 

“ Here are books of science, or rather of occult igno¬ 
rance ; of such are those which contain any kind of 
sorcery—execrable according to most people; in my 
opinion contemptible. Such also are- the books of 
judicial astrology.” “What do you say, father? The 
books of judicial astrology ! ” I cried with enthusiasm. 
“ These are the books we make most of in Persia. They 
rule all the actions of our lives, and determine us in all 


LETTER CXXXV. 


131 

our undertakings: in fact, the astrologers are our spiri¬ 
tual fathers, and more, for they take part in the govern¬ 
ment of the state.” “ If that is so,” said he, “you live 
under a yoke much heavier than that of reason. Yours 
must be the strangest of all governments: I pity from 
my heart a family, and above all a nation, which permits 
the planets to have such ascendancy over them.” “ We 
make use of astrology,” replied I, “just as you make use 
of algebra. Every nation has its proper science, accord¬ 
ing to which it guides its policy. All the astrologers 
together have never committed so many follies in Persia, 
as a single algebraist has done here. Do you think that 
the fortuitous concourse of the stars is not as sure a 
guide as all the fine reasoning of your system-monger ? 1 
If the votes on that subject were counted in France and 
in Persia, astrology would have good reason to triumph; 
you would see the schemers properly humbled, from 
which how disastrous a corollary might be deduced 
against them! ” 

Our dispute was interrupted, and I had to leave him. 

Paris, the 26th of the moon of 
Rhamazan, 1719. 


1 Law, the banker. 


132 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
