Letter L. 

Rica to * * *. 

I have met some people to whom virtue was so natural, 
that they were not even conscious of it; they applied 
themselves to their duty without any compulsion, and 
were led to it instinctively; far from making their own 
admirable qualities a subject of conversation, it seemed as 
if they were quite ignorant of their existence. Such 
people I love; not those men who seem to be astonished 
at their own virtue, and who look upon a good deed as a 
marvel the relation of which should excite wonder. 

If modesty is a necessary virtue in those to whom 
Heaven has given great talents, what is to be said of 
those insects who dare to exhibit a pride which would 
dishonour the greatest men ? 

On every hand I meet people who talk constantly 
about themselves; their conversation is a mirror which 
reflects only their own impertinent faces; they will tell 
you of the merest trifles that happen to them, and expect 
the interest they take in them to magnify their importance 
in your eyes; they have done everything, seen everything, 
said everything, thought everything ; they are a pattern to 
all mankind, a subject of inexhaustible comparisons, a 
source of precedents which never dries up. Oh ! how 
insipid is self-praise! 

Some days ago a man of this type worried us for two 
homs^-about himself, his worth, his talents; but, since 

Q 

EX Si 

LIBRIS * 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


114 

there is no such thing as perpetual motion, he had to 
cease. It was then our turn to talk, and we took it. 

A man, who seemed sufficiently splenetic, commenced 
to grumble at the tediousness of conversation. “ What ! 
are there none but fools, who describe their own character, 
and bring everything home to themselves?” “You are 
right,” replied our tattling friend abruptly. “Nobody 
does as I do; I never praise myself; I have means, am 
well-born, spend freely, and my friends say that I have 
some wit; but I never talk of all that; if I have any 
good qualities, that which I set most store by, is my 
modesty.” 

I wondered at this malapert ; and while he was talking 
very loud, I whispered, “ Happy is he who has enough of 
vanity never to boast of his own qualities, who dreads 
the ridicule of his audience, and never hurts the pride of 
others by exalting himself ! ” 

Paris, the 20th of the moon of 
Rhaniazan, 1713.
