Letter XXXVII.

USBEK TO IBBEN, AT SMYRNA.

The King of France is old . 1 We have no examples in our histories of such a long reign as his. It is said that he possesses in a very high degree the faculty of making himself obeyed : he governs with equal ability his family, his court, and his kingdom : he has often been heard to say, that, of all existing governments, that of the Turks, or that of our august Sultan, pleased him best: such is his high opinion of Oriental statecraft . 2

I have studied his character, and I have found certain contradictions which I cannot reconcile. For example, he has a minister who is only eighteen years old , 3 and a mistress who is fourscore ; 4 he loves his religion, and yet he cannot abide those who assert that it ought to be strictly observed ; 5 although he flies from the noise of cities, and is inclined to be reticent, from morning till

* Barbezieux, son of Louvois, Louis’s youngest minister, held office at twenty-three, not eighteen ; and he was dead in 1713.

* Madame de Maintenon. 5 The Jansenists.

night he is engaged in getting himself talked about; he is fond of trophies and victories, but he has as great a dread of seeing a good general at the head of his own troops, as at the head of an army of his enemies. It has never I believe happened to anyone but himself, to be burdened with more wealth than even a prince could hope for, and yet at the same time steeped in such poverty as a private person could ill brook.

He delights to reward those who serve him; but he pays as liberally the assiduous indolence of his courtiers, as the labours in the field of his captains; often the man who undresses him, or who hands him his serviette at table, is preferred before him who has taken cities and gained battles ; he does not believe that the greatness of a monarch is compatible with restriction in the distribution of favours ; and, without examining into the merit of a man, he will heap benefits upon him, believing that his selection makes the recipient worthy; accordingly, he has been known to bestow a small pension upon a man who had run off two leagues from the enemy, and a good government on another who had gone four.

Above all, he is magnificent in his buildings; there are more statues in his palace gardens 1 than there are citizens in a large town. His bodyguard is as strong as that of the prince before whom all the thrones of the earth tremble ; 2 his armies are as numerous, his resources as great, and his finances as inexhaustible.

Paris, the 7th of the moon of Maharram, 1713.

£7
