Letter XXX. 

Rica to the Same, at Smyrna. 

The curiosity of the people of Paris exceeds all bounds. 
When I arrived, they stared at me as if I had dropped from 
the sky: old and young, men, women, and children, were all 
agog to see me. If I went abroad, everybody flew to the 
window. If I visited the Tuileries, I was immediately 
surrounded by a circle of gazers, the women forming a 
rainbow woven of a thousand colours. When I went 
sight-seeing, a hundred lorgnettes were speedily levelled 
at me : in fact, never was a man so stared at as I have 
been. I smiled frequently when I heard people who had 
never travelled beyond their own door, saying to each 
other, “ He certainly looks very like a Persian.” One 
thing struck me : I found my portraits everywhere—in 
all the shops, on every mantelpiece—so fearful were 
they lest they should not see enough of me. 

So much distinction could not fail to be burdensome. 
I do not consider myself such a rare and wonderful 
specimen of humanity ; and although I have a very good 
opinion of myself, I would never have dreamt that I 
could have disturbed the peace of a great city, where I 
was quite unknown. I therefore resolved to change my 
Persian dress for a European one, in order to see if my 
countenance would still strike people as wonderful. This 
experiment made me acquainted with my true value. 
Divested of everything foreign in my garb, I found 


i. 


L 


74 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


myself estimated at my proper rate. I had reason to 
complain of my tailor, who had made me lose so suddenly 
the attention and good opinion of the public ; for I sank 
immediately into the merest nonentity. Sometimes I 
would be as much as an hour in a given company, with¬ 
out attracting the least notice, or having an opportunity 
given me to speak; but, if anyone chanced to inform the 
company that I was a Persian, I soon overheard a mur¬ 
mur all round me, “ Oh ! ah ! a Persian, is he ? Most 
amazing ! However can anybody be a Persian ? ” 

Paris, the 6th of the moon of 
Chalval, 1712.
