Letter LIII. 

Zelis to Usbek, at Paris. 

No passion was ever stronger or more vehement than 
that of Cosrou. the white eunuch, for my slave Zelida ; he 
has asked her in marriage with such persistence, that I 
can no longer refuse him. And why should I object, 

r 

when her mother does not, and since Zelida herself seems 
satisfied with the idea of this mock union, and the empty 
shadow which it offers her ? 

What does she want with this wretched creature ? She 
is marrying jealousy personified, a husband who is no 
husband; who will only exchange his coldness for an im¬ 
potent despair ; who, by perpetually recalling the memory 
of what he was, will but remind her of what he no longer 
is; who, always ready to possess, but never possessing, 
will for ever deceive himself and her, keeping her con¬ 
stantly alive to the wretchedness of her condition. 

And then ! to be always in dreams and fancies; to live 
only in imagination ; to be always on the threshold, and 
never in the abode, of pleasure ; languishing in the arms 
of impotence, responding, not to happy sighs, but to vain 
regrets! 


LETTER LIV. 


121 


How one ought to despise a man of that kind, made 
only to guard and not to own ! I seek love, and cannot 
find it! 

I speak to you freely, because you love my artlessness, 
and prefer my frankness and amorous disposition to the 
affected modesty of my companions. 

I have heard you say a thousand times that eunuchs 
do enjoy a certain pleasure with women, which we know 
nothing of; that nature compensates them for their loss, 
having means with which to amend their unfortunate con¬ 
dition ; that one may cease to be a man, but not to feel 
desire; and that in that state one acquires a third sense, 
and exchanges, as it were, one pleasure for another. 

If that be so, Zelida will have less to complain of. It 
is something to live with people who are not, after all, so 
miserable. Send me your instructions in the matter, and 
let me know if you wish the marriage to take place in the 
seraglio. Farewell. 

The Seraglio at Ispahan, the 5th of the 
moon of Chalval, 1713.
