Letter LXII. 

Zelis to Usbek, at Paris. 

Your daughter having attained her seventh year, I have 
judged it time to remove her to the inner apartments of 
the seraglio, and not to wait till she should be ten to 
entrust her to the care of the black eunuchs. It is im¬ 
possible to deprive a young girl too soon of the liberty of 
childhood, and to give her a holy upbringing within 
those walls sacred to modesty. 

For I am not of the opinion of those mothers who 
only sequester their daughters when they are about to 
bestow them in marriage, who sentence, rather than con¬ 
secrate them, to the seraglio, and force them to embrace 
a manner of life which they ought to have taught them to 
love. Must we expect everything from the compulsion 
of reason, and leave nothing to the gentle influences of 
habit ? 

We are in vain told of the state of subjection in which 
nature has placed us. It is not enough to make us 


140 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


realize this; we must be made to practise submission, 
in order that we may be upheld at that critical time when 
the passions begin to awaken, and that we may learn 
voluntary subordination. 

Were we only attached to you by duty, we might 
sometimes forget it; or if it were inclination alone that 
bound us, a more potent feeling might perhaps weaken 
it. But, when the laws bestow us on one man they with¬ 
draw us from all others, and place us as far from them as 
if a hundred thousand leagues intervened. 

Nature, diligent in the service of men, has been no 
niggard in her dowry of desire; to women also she has 
not been unkind, and has destined us to be the living 
instruments of the enjoyment of our masters; she has 
set us on fire with passion in order that they may live at 
ease; should they quit their insensibility, she has pro¬ 
vided us to restore them to it, without our ever being 
able to taste the happiness of the condition into which we 
put them. 

Yet, Usbek, do not think that your situation is happier 
than mine; I have experienced here a thousand pleasures 
unknown to you. My imagination has laboured without 
ceasing to make me conscious of their worth; I have 
lived, and you have only languished. 

Even in this prison where you keep me I am freer than 
you. You can only redouble your care in guarding me, 
that I may rejoice at your uneasiness; and your sus¬ 
picions, your jealousy, your annoyance, are so many 
marks of your dependence. 


LETTER LX III. 


>41 


Continue, dear Usbek, to have me watched night and 
day; take no ordinary precautions; increase my happi¬ 
ness in assuring your own; and know, that I dread 
nothing except your indifference. 

The Seraglio at Ispahan, the 2nd of the 
first moon of Rebiab, 1714.
