Letter XCVIL 

The chief Eunuch to Usbek, at Paris. 

A great number of yellow women from the kingdom of 
Visapour have arrived here. I have bought one for your 
brother, the governor of Mazenderan, who sent me a 
month ago his sublime commands and a hundred 
tomans. 

I am skilled in women, especially as they can no longer 
delude me, and as my heart does not interfere with my 
understanding. 

I have never seen beauty so regular, so perfect: her 
dazzling eyes lighten up her countenance, and heighten 
the lustre of a complexion which might eclipse all the 
charms of Circassia. 

The chief eunuch of a merchant of Ispahan bade for 
her against me: but she withdrew herself disdainfully 
from his gaze, and seemed to invite mine ; as if to tell me 
that a wretched merchant was unworthy of her, and that 
she was destined for a more illustrious husband. 

I confess to you, that I feel within me a sacred joy, 
when I think of the charms of this lovely person. I fancy 
I see her entering the seraglio of your brother: I delight 
myself with a foresight of the astonishment of all his 
wives ; the haughty grief of some; the silent but heavier 
sorrow of others; the malicious pleasure of those who 
have nothing to hope for, and the enraged ambition of 
those whose hope is not yet dead. 


44 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


I travel from one end of the kingdom to the other, to 
change the entire face of a seraglio. What passions shall 
I excite ! What terrors and punishments am I preparing ! 

Nevertheless, in spite of this internal disturbance, out¬ 
ward tranquillity will be undisturbed: great revolutions 
will be hidden in the depths of the heart; grief will be 
repressed and joy will be restrained ; obedience will be 
no less prompt, nor discipline less inflexible : amiability, 
which is always exacted, will spring from the depths of 
despair itself. 

We have noticed that the more women we have under 
our care, the less trouble they give us. A greater neces¬ 
sity to be agreeable, less opportunity for conspiring, more 
examples of submission ; all this increases their fetters. 
They are constantly watchful of the doings of their neigh¬ 
bours : they seem to unite themselves with us to render 
themselves more dependent: they take part in our labour, 
and open our eyes when they are closed. What do I say ? 
They continually incite their master against their rivals, 
unaware how close at hand their own punishment 
may be. 

But all this, magnificent lord, all this is nothing without 
the master’s presence. What can we do with this vain 
show of an authority which can never be entirely im¬ 
parted ? We represent, and that but feebly, only the half 
of yourself: we can only show them a hateful severity; 
whereas you can temper fear with hope, and are more 
absolute when you caress than when you threaten. 

Return then, magnificent lord, return to this abode, and 


LETTER XCVI1I. 


45 


impress throughout it your authority. Come and alleviate 
despairing passions: come and remove every pretext to 
go astray: come to pacify complaining love, and to make 
duty itself pleasant: come, lastly, to relieve your faithful 
eunuchs of a burden which grows heavier every day. 

The Seraglio at Ispahan, the 8th of the 
moon of Zilhage, 1716.
