Letter LXIX. 

USBEK TO RHEDI, AT VENICE. 

You would never have dreamed that I could become a 
greater metaphysician than I was. Such is the case, 
however; and you will be convinced of it, when you have 
waded through this flood of my philosophy. 


164 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


The most sensible of those philosophers, who have 
considered the nature of God, have declared that He is a 
being supremely perfect; but they have sadly abused this 
idea. They have tabulated all the various perfections 
which man is capable of possessing and of imagining, and 
with these they have clad the idea of God, not thinking 
that these attributes are often contradictory, and, being 
mutually destructive, cannot subsist in the same indivi¬ 
dual. 

The western poets tell how a painter, 1 wishing to make 
a likeness of the goddess of beauty, gathered together the 
most beautiful Greek women, and, having taken from 
each that grace ih which she most excelled, combined 
their selected charms into a picture of the loveliest of 
the goddesses. If, on that account, a man should think 
that she was both fair and dark, that her eyes were 
black and blue, and that she was, at one and the same 
time, sweet-tempered and haughty, he would pass for a 
fool. 

God often falls short of a perfection which would make 
Him very imperfect: but He is never limited except by 
Himself; He is His own law. Thus, although God is 
all-powerful, He can neither break His promises, nor 
deceive men. Often too, His impotence is not subjective, 
but objective; and that is the reason why He cannot 
change the nature of things. 

So, also, it is not so very wonderful that some of our 
learned men should have denied the infinite foreknow- 
1 Zeuxis, when he painted Helen for the Agrigentines. 


LETTER LXIX. 165 

ledge of God, upon the principle that it is incompatible 
with His justice. 

However bold this idea may be, it is countenanced 
remarkably by metaphysics. According to metaphysical 
principles, it is impossible that God should foresee such 
things as depend upon the determination of free causes; 
because that which has not happened does not exist, and 
consequently, cannot he known; for nothing, having no 
properties, cannot be perceived: God cannot read a will 
which does not exist, nor discern in the mind what it 
does not contain, for, until the mind is made up, the 
thing determined on is not in it. 

The mind is the author of its determination ; but there 
are occasions when it is so irresolute, that it does not even 
know for which side to determine. Often indeed it makes 
a selection only to use its liberty; in such a manner that 
God cannot foresee its choice, neither in its own action, 
nor in the operation of objects upon it. 

How could God foresee things which depend upon the 
determination of free causes? He could only see them in 
two ways : by conjecture, which is incompatible with His 
infinite foreknowledge; or He could see them as necessary 
effects proceeding infallibly from a cause which produces 
them as infallibly—a method even more at variance with 
divine foreknowledge, for it supposes that the mind is 
free, with a freedom, however, no greater than that of a 
billiard ball, which is at liberty to move when it is 
struck by another. 

Do not think, however, that I wish to limit God’s know- 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


166 

ledge. Since He directs the actions of His creatures 
according to His pleasure, He knows all that He wishes 
to know. But although He can see everything, He does 
not always make use of that power : He generally leaves 
man the power to do a thing or to leave it alone, in order 
that he may be able to choose between right and wrong; 
and this is why God renounces the absolute authority 
which He has over the mind. But, when He desires to 
know anything, He always knows it, because He has only 
to will that a thing shall happen as He sees it, and to 
make His creatures conform to His will. It is thus that 
He selects what shall happen from the number of mere 
possibilities, fixing by His decrees the future determina¬ 
tions of men’s minds, and depriving them of the power 
which He gave them to do or not to do. 

Let me employ a comparison in a matter which 
transcends all comparisons:—A monarch, ignorant of 
what his ambassador will do in an important affair, if he 
wishes to know, has only to command him to conduct 
the negotiation in such or such a manner, and he will be 
certain that the thing will happen as he planned it. 

The Koran and the Hebrew books are constant wit¬ 
nesses against the dogma of .absolute foreknowledge: 
God appears throughout these writings as ignorant of the 
future determinations of men’s minds : and it seems that 
this was the first truth that Moses taught mankind. 

God placed Adam in the terrestrial paradise, on con¬ 
dition that he should not eat of a certain fruit: an 
absurd command to be given by a being acquainted with 


LETTER LXX. 


167 

the future determinations of men’s minds; for, in short, 
could such a being make His favour depend on such 
conditions, without rendering it ridiculous ? It is as if a 
man who was aware of the capture of Bagdad should say 
to another, “ I will give you a hundred tomans if Bagdad 
is not taken.” 1 Would that not be a very sorry jest ? 

My dear Rhedi, why all this philosophy? God is so 
far above us that we cannot perceive even His clouds. 
We have no knowledge of Him except in His command¬ 
ments. He is a spirit, immense and infinite. May His 
greatness make us conscious of our own weakness. To 
humble ourselves continually, is to adore Him con¬ 
tinually. 

Paris, the last day of the moon of 
Chahban, 1714.
