Letter CL V. 

USBEK TO NeSSIR, AT ISPAHAN. 

Happy is he, who, estimating at its full value a life of 
ease and tranquillity, makes his own family the centre of 
his thought, and knows no other land save that in which 
he was bom ! 

I live in a barbarous country, surrounded by every¬ 
thing that offends me, and absent from all in which I 
am interested. A sombre melancholy holds me; I am 
dreadfully depressed : I feel as if I were about to be 
annihilated; and I only recover myself when some 
dismal jealousy awakes within me, and brings in its train 
fear, suspicion, hatred, and regret. 

You understand me, Nessir; my heart is as open to 
you as your own. You would pity me, if you knew my 
deplorable condition. Sometimes I have to wait six 
whole months for news of the seraglio; I count every 
moment as it passes, prolonging them by my impatience ; 
and when the expected moment is about to arrive, a 
sudden revolution takes place in my heart; my hand 
trembles to open a letter that may be fatal; the anxiety 
which caused my despair seems to me the happiest 
frame of mind in which I could be, and I dread to be 
forced from it by some stroke more cruel than a thousand 
deaths. 

But, whatever reason I may have had to leave my 

B B 


ii. 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


186 

country, and although I owe my life to my flight, I can 
no longer, Nessir, endure this dreadful exile. Should I 
not die all the same a prey to grief? I have pressed 
Rica a thousand times to leave this foreign land, but he 
always thwarts my purpose, and keeps me here under a 
thousand pretexts: he seems to have forgotten his 
country, or rather he seems to have forgotten me, he is 
so indifferent to my grief. 

How wretched lam! I wish to see my country again, 
perhaps only to become more wretched. Ah ! what shall 
I do there ? I shall but hand my head to my enemies. 
That is not all: I shall enter the seraglio, where I must 
demand an account of the disastrous time of my absence ; 
and should I find any criminals, what am I to do ? And 
if the idea of it alone overcomes me at such a distance, 
how will it be when my presence brings it home to me ? 
How shall it be, if I must see, if I must hear what I dare 
not imagine without a shudder? How shall it be, in 
short, if I myself must order the infliction of punish¬ 
ments, which shall be everlasting witnesses to my own 
vexation and despair ? 

I shall shut myself up within walls more terrible to me 
than to the women which they guard; I shall take with 
me all my suspicions; the eagerness of my wives will 
not remove them in the least ; in my bed, in their arms, 
I shall only possess my anxiety: at a time so unsuitable 
for reflection, my jealousy will make occasions for it. 
Worthless scum of human kind, vile slaves whose hearts 
are for ever closed to all the feelings of love, you would 


LETTER CLVI. 187 

no longer grumble at your condition, if you knew the 
misery of mine. 

Paris, the 4th of the moon of 
Chahban, 1719.
