Letter L V. 

Rica to Ibben, at Smyrna. 

Among the Europeans, the first quarter of an hour of 
marriage settles all difficulties; the last favours are always 
contemporary with the marriage blessing. The women 
here are not like those of Persia, who sometimes dispute 
the ground for months together. They give themselves 
at once ; and if they lose nothing, it is because they have 
nothing to lose. One shameful result of this is, that one 
can always tell the moment of their defeat; and, without 


LETTER LV. 


125 


consulting the stars, it is possible to predict to the very 
hour the birth of their children. 

The French seldom speak of their wives: 1 they are 
afraid to do so before people who may know them better 
than themselves. 

There are, among the French, a set of most miserable 
men, whom nobody comforts—jealous husbands, to wit; 
there are among them those whom everybody hates— 
namely, jealous husbands; there are men whom the 
whole world despises—once more, jealous husbands. 

And so, there is no country where there are so few of 
them as in France. Their peace of mind is not based 
upon the confidence which they have in their wives ; but 
on the bad opinion which they have of them. All the 
wise precautions of the Asiatics; the veils which cover 
them, the prisons in which they are kept, the eunuchs 
who guard them, seem to the French only so many 
obstacles better fitted to exercise than to tire the inge¬ 
nuity of women. Here, husbands accept their lot with a 
good grace, and the infidelities of their wives seem to 
them as inevitable as fate. A husband, who would wish 
to monopolize his wife, would be looked upon as a dis¬ 
turber of the pleasure of the public, as a lunatic who 
wanted to enjoy the light of the sun to the exclusion of 
everybody else. 

Here, a husband who loves his wife is a man who has 

1 It was a rule of good society. “ Most men understand that 
they should say very little about their wives ; but few know that 
they should talk still less about themselves.”—L a Rochefoucauld. 


126 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


not enough merit to engage the affections of some other 
woman ; who makes a bad use of the power given him by 
the law to supply those pleasures which he can obtain in 
no other way ; who claims all his rights to the prejudice of 
the whole community; who appropriates to his own use 
that which he only holds in pawn; and who tries, as 
far as he can, to overturn the tacit agreement, in which 
the happiness of both sexes consists. The fame, so little 
desired in Asia, of being married to a beautiful woman, 
is here the source of no uneasiness. No one has ever to 
seek far for entertainment. - A prince consoles himself 
for the loss of one place by taking another: when Bagdad 
fell to the Turks, were we not taking from the Mogul the 
fortress of Candahar ? 

Generally speaking, a man who winks at his wife’s in¬ 
fidelities, does not lose respect; on the contrary, he is 
praised for his prudence : dishonour only attaches to 
special cases. 

Not that there are no virtuous women ; there are, and 
they may be said to be distinguished too. My conductor 
always took care to point them out; but they were all so 
ugly that one would require to be a saint not to hate 
virtue. 

After what I have told you of the morals and manners 
of this country, you will easily imagine that the French 
do not altogether plume themselves upon their constancy. 
They believe that it is as ridiculous to swear eternal love 
to a woman, as to insist that one will always be in the 
best of health, or always as happy as the day is long. 


LETTER LVI. 


127 


When they promise a woman to love her all their lives, 
they suppose that she on her side undertakes to be always 
lovable ; and if she breaks her word, they think that they 
are no longer bound by theirs. 

Paris, the 7th of the moon of 
Zilcade, 1714.
