Letter C.XXXV 

Rhedi to Rica, at Paris. 

Nothing has interested me more since my arrival in 
Europe than the history and origin of republics. You 
know that most Asiatics have not only no notion of this 
form of government, but that their imagination is unable 
to conceive the possibility of there being any other in 
the world than despotism. 

The first governments of which we know anything were 
monarchical; it was only by chance, and in the course 
of ages, that republics were formed. 

Greece, having been destroyed by a flood, new inhabi¬ 
tants came to people it; it drew almost all its colonies 
from Egypt and the neighbouring countries of Asia; and 
as these countries were governed by kings, the races which 
came from them were governed in the same way. But 
the tyranny of these princes becoming intolerable, they 
threw off the yoke, and from the ruins of so many king¬ 
doms sprang those republics which made Greece so 
prosperous, and the only cultured nation among a crowd 
of barbarians. 

Love of liberty, and hatred of kings, preserved the 
independence of Greece for a long time, and extended far 
and wide the republican form of government. The 
Greek cities found allies in Asia Minor; they sent thither 
colonies as free as themselves, which served them as a 
1 This letter contains the gist of the “ Esprit des Lois.” 


LETTER CXXXI. 


121 


rampart against the attacks of the kings of Persia. This 
is not all: Greece peopled Italy; and Italy, Spain, and 
perhaps Gaul. Everyone knows that the wonderful Hes¬ 
peria, so famous among the ancients, was at first Greece, 
regarded by its neighbours as an abode of bliss. The 
Greeks, who failed to find at home that happy country, 
went to Italy in search of it; the inhabitants of Italy, to 
Spain; and those of Spain, to Bettica or Portugal; so 
that all these countries bore the name of Hesperia among 
the ancients. These Greek colonies brought with them 
a spirit of liberty derived from that delightful land. It 
is on this account that we hardly ever hear of a monarchy 
in Italy, Spain, or Gaul in these remote times. It will 
shortly appear that the peoples of the north and of Ger¬ 
many were not less free ; and if traces of kingly govern¬ 
ment are found among them, it is because the chiefs of 
armies or republics have been mistaken for monarchs. 

All this took place in Europe, for Asia and Africa have 
always been oppressed by despots, with the exception of 
some cities in Asia Minor already mentioned, and the 
Carthagenian republic in Africa. 

The world was divided between two powerful republics: 
that of Rome and that of Carthage. Nothing is better 
known than the beginnings of the Roman republic, and 
there is nothing of which we have less knowledge than 
the origin of that of Carthage. Of the African princes 
who succeeded Dido, and how they lost their power, we 
know absolutely nothing. The wonderful rise of the 
Roman republic would have been of immense benefit to 


ii. 


R 


122 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


the world, if there had not existed an unjust distinction 
between the Roman citizens and the conquered nations ; 
if the governors of provinces had received less power ; if 
the righteous laws enacted to prevent their tyranny had 
been observed, and if, to render these laws of no effect, 
the governors had not employed the very wealth amassed 
by their injustice. 

Liberty would seem to have been intended for the 
genius of the European races, and slavery for that of the 
Asiatics. In vain the Romans offered that priceless trea¬ 
sure to the Cappadocians. That mean-spirited nation 
refused it, and rushed into slavery with the same eager¬ 
ness with which other races fly to liberty. 

Caesar destroyed the Roman republic, and subjected it 
to arbitrary power. 

For a long time Europe groaned under the violence of 
a military government, and the gentle Roman sway was 
changed into cruel oppression. 

Meantime an immense number of unknown races came 
out of the north, and poured like torrents into the Roman 
provinces: finding it as easy to conquer as to rob, they 
dismembered the empire, and founded kingdoms. These 
peoples were free, and they put such restrictions on the 
authority of their kings, that they were properly only 
chiefs or generals. Thus these kingdoms, although 
founded by force, never endured the yoke of the con¬ 
queror. When the peoples of Asia, such as the Turks 
and the Tartars, made conquests, being subject to the 
will of one person, they thought only of providing him 


LETTER CXXXII. 


123 


with new subjects, and of establishing by force of arms 
his reign of might; but the peoples of the north, free in 
their own countries, having seized the Roman provinces, 
did not give their chiefs much power. Some of these 
races, indeed, like the Vandals in Africa, and the Goths 
in Spain, deposed their kings when they ceased to please 
them; and, amongst others, the power of the prince was 
limited in a thousand different ways ; a great number of 
lords partook it with him ; a war was never undertaken 
without their consent; the spoils were divided between 
the chief and the soldiers; and the laws were made in 
national assemblies. Here you have the fundamental 
principle of all those states which were formed from the 
ruins of the Roman Empire. 

Venice, the 20th of the moon of 
Rhegeb, 1719.
