Letter LXXIII. 

Rica to * * *. 

I HAVE heard much talk of a sort of court called the 
French Academy. There is no tribunal in the world 
which is less respected; for they say that no sooner does 

1 Decisionnaire in the original, a word invented by Montesquieu 

to describe a man who lays down the law upon everything. 

3 Tavernier (1605-1689) and Chardin (1643-1713), the Persian 
travellers from whose books Montesquieu derived his knowledge of 
Persia. 


LETTER LXXIII. 


<7 


it issue a decree than the people break it, and substitute 
laws which the Academy is bound to follow. 

Some time ago, in order to establish its authority, it 
issued a code of its decisions.' This child of so many 
fathers may be said to have been old when it was born ; 
and although it was legitimate, a bastard, 1 2 born before it, 
nearly strangled it at its birth. 

Those who compose this court have no other function 
than to jabber perpetually : eulogy suggests itself as the 
one subject of their incessant babble; and as soon as 
they are initiated into its mysteries, a frenzy of panegyric 
lays hold of them, and will not be shaken off. 

This body has forty heads, all of them chokeful of 
tropes, of metaphors, and of antitheses; so that their lips 
scarcely ever open without an exclamation, and their 
ears are always waiting to be touched with rhythm and 
harmony. As for their eyes, they are out of the question ; 
the Academy seems to be intended to talk and not to 
see. It is not firm on its legs; for time, which is its 
scourge, smites it incessantly and destroys all it does. 
It is said that at one time its hands were grasping; 
I have nothing to say on the subject, and will leave those 
to decide it who know more about it than I do. 

Such eccentricities, # # #, are unknown in our Persia. 

1 The dictionary of the Academy. 

2 The dictionary of Furetiere. The author was expelled from 
the Academy in 1685, because he was accused of having profited by 
the work of his fellow-Academicians in the composition of the dic¬ 
tionary which bears his name. 


172 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


We have no bent towards what is odd and extravagant; 
we endeavour to shape our simple customs and artless 
manners in the mould of nature. 

Paris, the 27th of the moon of 
Zilhage, 1715.
