Letter LI. 

Nargum, Persian Envoy in Muscovy, to Usbek, 
at Paris. 

The news has come from Ispahan, that you have left 
Persia, and are actually in Paris. Why was I left to 
learn these tidings from another than yourself? 

By order of the king of kings I have now been five 


LETTER LI. 


n 5 


years in this country, where I have concluded several 
important transactions. 

You know that the Czar is the only Christian prince 
whose interests are allied to those of Persia, because, like 
us, he is the enemy of the Turks. 

His empire is larger than ours, for the distance between 
Moscow and the extremities of his dominions on the 
Chinese frontier measures a thousand leagues. 

He is absolute master of the lives and goods of his 
subjects, who are all slaves, with the exception of four 
families. The vicar of the prophets, the king of kings, 
whose footstool is the sky, does not wield a sceptre more 
puissant. 

In view of the frightful climate of this country, one 
would never think that exile could be a punishment for a 
Muscovite : nevertheless, when a man of consequence is 
disgraced, he is banished to Siberia. 

It is the law of our prophet which forbids us to drink 
wine, it is that of their prince which forbids the 
Muscovites. 

They receive their guests in a style very unlike the 
Persians. When a stranger enters a house, the husband 
presents his wife to him, and he kisses her : this is counted 
an act of courtesy to the husband. 

Although fathers, in arranging their daughters’ mar¬ 
riages, usually stipulate that the husband shall not whip 
them, yet you would hardly believe how dearly the Mus¬ 
covite women like to be beaten; 1 they are unable to 
1 These manners have changed.—(M.) 


ii6 PERSIAN LETTERS. 

understand how they can possess their husband’s love, if 
he does not thrash them in proper style. If he is slack 
in this matter, it is an unpardonable indication of cold¬ 
ness. Here is a letter which a Muscovite wife recently 
wrote to her mother :— 

“ My dear Mother, 

“ I am the most wretched woman in the world. I 
have left nothing undone to make my husband love me, 
and I have never been able to succeed. Yesterday, 
having a thousand things to attend to in the house, I 
went out, and stayed away all day. I expected on my 
return that he would beat me severely, but he did not 
say a single word. My sister fares much better; her 
husband beats her every day; he knocks her down at once 
if she only looks at a man: they are very affectionate, 
and there is between them the best understanding in the 
world. 

“It is that which makes her so proud, but I will not 
allow her to triumph over me any longer. I am resolved 
to make my husband love me, whatever it may cost: I 
will so anger him that he will be forced to give me marks 
of his affection. No one shall say that I am not beaten, 
and that I am of no consequence in my own house. I 
will cry out with all my might at the least touch, so that 
people may think that all goes well; and if any of my 
neighbours should come to my aid, I feel as if I would 
strangle them. I wish, my dear mother, you would point 
out to my husband how unworthily he treats me. My 


LETTER LI. 


U 7 

father is a gentleman, and behaved differently; indeed, 
if I remember rightly, when I was a little girl he used to 
love you too much. I embrace you, my dear mother.” 

The Muscovites may not leave their country, even in 
order to travel; and so, separated from other nations by 
the law of the land, they have become attached to their 
ancient customs, all the more warmly, that they do not 
think it possible to have others. 

But the reigning prince 1 wishes to change everything; 
he had a great quarrel with his subjects about their 
beards; the clergy and the monks defended their igno¬ 
rance with equal obstinacy. 

He is bent on the improvement of the arts, and leaves 
nothing undone to spread throughout Europe and Asia 
the fame of his nation, till now forgotten, and hardly 
even known to itself. 

Restless, and always occupied, he wanders about his 
vast dominions, leaving everywhere tokens of his savage 
nature. 

Then he quits them, as if they were too small to 
contain him, and goes to Europe exploring other pro¬ 
vinces and new kingdoms. 

I embrace you, my dear Usbek, and beg you to send 
me your news. 

Moscow, the 2nd of the moon of 
Chalval, 1713. 


* Peter the Great. 


IS 


PERSIAN LETTERS.
