Letter L VIII. 

Rica to Rhedi, at Venice. 

My dear Rhedi, there are in Paris a great many trades. 
Some good-natured creature will offer you for a little 
money the secret of making gold. Another promises you 
the love of the spirits of the air, if you will see no women 
for a small trifle of thirty years. 

Then you will meet with wizards so skilful, that they can 
tell you all your life, with the simple proviso of a quarter 
of an hour’s conversation with your servants. 

Adroit women turn virginity into a flower, which 
withers and blooms again every day, and is gathered 
for the hundredth time with more anguish than the 
first. 

There are other women as skilful, who, repairing by 
the force of their art all the ravages of time, know how to 


132 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


restore to a face beauty enough to strike one blind, and 
even to summon a woman from the very end of life’s 
journey back to its tender youthful opening. 

All these people live, or seek a livelihood, in this great 
city, the mother of invention. 

The incomes of the citizens cannot be farmed: they 
consist only in skill and industry : each has his own, and 
makes the best of it. 

He who would wish to count the dervishes who run 
after the revenue of some mosque, might as well attempt 
to number the sands of the sea, or the slaves of our 
monarch. 

An infinite number of professors of languages, of arts, 
and of sciences, teach what they do not know; and their 
talent is not by any means despicable; for much less wit 
is required to exhibit one’s knowledge, than to teach what 
one knows nothing of. 

One cannot die here, except suddenly: death is left no 
other method of exercising his power; because, in every 
hole and corner, people are ready with infallible cures for 
every imaginable disease. 

All the shops are hung with invisible nets, in which the 
customers are snared. Sometimes, however, one gets off 
with a good bargain. A shopgirl will wheedle a man for 
a stricken hour, and all to make him buy a packet of 
toothpicks. 

Everyone who goes from this city, leaves it a warier 
man than when he entered : by dint of throwing away his 
means on others, he learns how to keep it to himself— 


LETTER LIX. 


*33 


the only benefit a stranger carries away from this sorceress 
of a city. 

Paris, the loth of the moon of 
Saphar, 1714.
