Letter CL I. 

SOLIM TO USBEK, AT PARIS. 

Were I to be silent any longer, I should be as guilty as 
the worst of the criminals in your seraglio. 

I was the confidant of the chief eunuch, the most 
faithful of your slaves. When he felt himself near his 
end, he sent for me, and spoke to me as follows : “ I am 
dying; but the only grief I have in leaving life, is that 
with my dying eyes I have seen the guilt of my master’s 
wives. May Heaven preserve him from all the misery 
which I foresee ! After my death, may my threatening 
shade appear to admonish these faithless ones of their 
duty, and to keep them still in awe ! Here are the keys 
of those dreaded places; take them to the eldest of the 
black eunuchs. But if, after my death, he should prove 
a careless guardian, remember to let your master know.” 
He expired in my arms with these words on his lips. 

I know that he wrote you some time before his death 
about the conduct of your wives: there is in the seraglio 
a letter which would have carried terror to every bosom 
had it been opened. That which you wrote since has 
been intercepted three leagues from here. I know not 
how it is ; but everything turns out badly. Meantime 
your wives do not maintain the least reserve: since the 
death of the chief eunuch, their licence knows no limit; 
Roxana alone abides by her duty, and preserves her 
modesty. Their morals grow more corrupt every day. 


182 


PERSIAN LETTERS. 


The faces of your wives no longer exhibit that stern and 
noble virtue which reigned there formerly; the unusual 
gaiety which prevails is in my opinion an infallible sign 
of some uncustomary pleasure. In the smallest trifles, I 
notice that liberties are taken before unknown. Even 
among your slaves there prevails a certain disinclination 
to do their duty, and to obey rules, which surprises me ; 
they are no longer inspired by that ardent zeal for your 
service, which seemed to animate the whole seraglio. 

For the last eight days your wives have been in the 
country, at one of your most secluded seats. They say 
that the slave who has charge of it has been bribed; and 
that, on the day before your wives arrived, he concealed 
two men in a secret recess in the wall of the principal 
room, from which they came out at night, when we had 
retired. The old eunuch, who is at present our chief, is 
an imbecile, who can be made to believe anything. 

I am possessed with a burning desire for vengeance on 
these traitors: and if Heaven, in your interest, ordains that 
you should think me capable of ruling, I promise you 
that, though your wives may not be virtuous, they shall at 
least be faithful. 

The Seraglio at Ispahan, the 6th of the 
first moon of Rebiab, 1719. 


LETTER CLIII. 


183
